Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION TO RATIONAL USE OF MEDICINES
Rational Use of Medicines requires that patients receive medications appropriate to their
clinical needs, in doses that meet their own individual requirements, for an adequate period of
time, and at affordable cost to them and the community (WHO, 1985). In other words,
rational use means ‘prescribing right medicines, in adequate dose for the sufficient duration
and appropriate to the clinical needs of the patient at lowest cost’. Medicine use is a complex
cyclical process and in the clinical context, rational drug use implies correct drug, appropriate
indication and selection with respect to efficacy, safety, suitability for the patient and cost.
The concept of Rational Use of Medicines is age old; however, it has attained more
significance and momentum in terms of medical and socioeconomic aspects recently. Three
tools have been identified to implement Rational Use of Medicines effectively. These include
Essential Medicines List, Standard Treatment Guidelines and Drug Formulary. To be
meaningful, all three tools should work in concert and subject forperiodic review and update.
I. The concept of Essential Medicines
Essential Medicines (EM) are those that satisfy the health care needs of the majority of
the population and therefore should be available at all times in appropriate amounts and in
appropriate dosage forms. Following the concept of EM, WHO published the first
Essential Medicine List (EML) in 1977, which has been updated successively every 5
year in view of changing world scenario about the medical needs and availability of new
and better drugs. The selection of these medicines is based on public health relevance,
evidence of efficacy and safety and comparative cost-effectiveness. These priority
medicines should be available at each functioning health care facility with assured quality
and adequate information at a price the individual and the community can afford.
The selection of essential medicines depends upon level of health care facility, adequate
data on the efficacy, safety, suitability and comparative cost effectiveness of available
treatments. In addition, stability of the product, need for special diagnostic or treatment
facilities and pharmacokinetic properties are also considered. Most essential medicines
are formulated as single compound. However, fixed dose combinations are selected only
when it has proven pharmacokinetic and/or pharmacodynamic advantages over single
compound administered separately. While comparing the cost of medicines among the
alternative treatments, the cost of total treatment and not the unit cost is considered. Other
factors taken into account include pattern of diseases, treatment facilities, training and
experience of the available personnel, financial resources etc.
Advantages of Essential Medicines
The implementation of the concept of EM has several logistic and prescribing advantages.
For example better management of medicines i.e. easier procurement, storage,
1

Introduction to Rational Use of Medicines
distribution, more manageable stock, better quality assurance, easier dispensing, less
fragmentation of budget with improve drug availability. Moreover, prescribing improves
due to focused training and drug information, better recognition of adverse drug reactions,
drug interactions and focused education efforts. The list of EM closely relates to
treatment guidelines for clinical diseases and is also used for the procurement and supply
of medicines in public sector, schemes for reimburses medicines costs and local medicine
production.
Its implementation is intended to be flexible and adaptable to different situations; which
medicines are regarded as essential remains a national responsibility.
II. Standard Treatment Guidelines
Standard Treatment Guidelines (STGs), treatment protocols, and prescribing policies are
defined as systematically developed statements designed to assist prescribers in making
decisions about the appropriate treatment and health care for specific clinical problem.
These guidelines usually reflect the consensus on the optimal treatment options within a
health facility or system. In fact, they represent one of the approaches to promote
therapeutically effective and economically efficient use of medicines.
STGs list the preferred pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment for common
health problems experienced by people in a specific health system. The pharmacological
treatment should include the name, dosage form, strength, average dose (pediatric and
adult), number of doses per day, and duration of treatment. Other information on
diagnosis and advice to the patient may also be included. The most common diseases and
serious medical conditions that have high morbidity and mortality rate are selected.
Treatment guidelines must have the most up-to-date and evidence based information to
determine appropriate treatment options by expert authors and reviewers. Effective
implementation, however, is perhaps the greatest challenge in introducing STGs. When
implemented effectively, it offers several advantages to patients, health care providers,
supply management personnel and policy makers as follows:
Patients,
 Most cost-effective optimal therapy is provided.
 Better compliance through consistency among prescribers.
 Improvement in availability of drugs.
 Overall better quality of care.
Health care providers,
 Provides standardized guidance to practitioners
 Quality of care standard- based on expert consensus and basis for monitoring
 Utilizes only formulary or essential medicines, so the health care system needs to
provideonly the medicines in the STGs.
Supply managers,
 Identification of medicines to be available for the most commonly treated problems.
2

Introduction to Rational Use of Medicines
 Facilitation of prepackaging of course-of-therapy quantities of commonly prescribed
items.
 Medicine demand more predictable, so forecasting more reliable
Health care policy makers,
 Provides focus therapeutic integration of special programs (diarrhea disease control,
acute respiratory infection)
 Provides a system for controlling cost by using funds more efficiently
STGs also have certain drawbacks. Establishing, developing and implementation of STGs
is a difficult, lengthy and time consuming process. Moreover, it needs to be updated
regularly to reflect changes in treatment strategies. If a regular schedule for updating the
STGs is not followed, they lose credibility and become obsolete. The extent of
information to be provided in each medical condition is often a difficult decision.
However, the STG manual should be concise and small enough to carry it easily.
Keyfeatures of a successful STG manual
Simplicity- The number of health problem is limited to commonly observed conditions.
Each clinical condition list a few salient features with clear and concise information on
pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment.
Credibility- Guidelines developed by the most respected experienced clinicians in the
country and revision is based on actual experience.
Treatment standards for all levels of health care facility- Health care providers use the
same standard treatment; however, the referral criterion differs. While the first choice
treatment for a patient depends upon the patient’s diagnosis and condition and not on the
prescriber.
Medicine supply based on standards- The supply of medicines must match with the
standard treatment and list of essential medicines.
Regular updating- Any change in the therapeutic options, bacterial resistance pattern
should be incorporated in the revised version to reflect current recommendations.
User friendly- The STGs should be published as small, durable pocket manual which
makeit convenient to carry and use.
III.Drug Formulary
A formulary is a compendium of practical drug information for clinical practice adapted
for use at a particular health care facility. It is a ready reference to key information on the
selection, prescribing, dispensing and administration of medicines. Although the concept
of formulary is old, a drug formulary is considered an essential element in achieving
rational prescribing in addition to controlling the costs. The task of development of a
formulary in a hospital is usually undertaken by Drugs and Therapeutics Committee with
a multidisciplinary membership of doctors, pharmacists, nurses and administrative staff.
3

Introduction to Rational Use of Medicines
The consultants place a request for inclusion of medicines along with its dosage
formulations to Drugs and Therapeutics Committee. The committee may accept the
request and include it in formularyor reject and suggest an alternative with information to
the prescriber. The committee then monitors the impact, cost and benefits of various
medicines in the health care facility. Depending on the outcome, the use of medicine is
extended or curtailed. Formularies have significant advantages for patients care.
However, the introduction of formularies may cause friction since it may be viewed as a
major threat to their clinical freedom. Effective multidisciplinary working methods and
consultation is needed to overcome this attitude. Potential advantages and disadvantages
of drug formularies are as follows:
Advantages
 Reduces range of products to be purchased / stored / distributed
 Encourages generic prescribing
 Lowers drug costs
 Improved knowledge of a limited number of medicines
 Improves drug safety
 Improves patient care
 Provides opportunity for multidisciplinary work
Disadvantages
 Restricts prescribing choice
 Reduces treatment options
 Inhibits introduction of new products
 Restricts research efforts
IV.Rational Approach To Therapeutics
Medicines should only be prescribed when necessary, and the benefit of administering the
medicine should be considered in relation to the risks involved. Bad prescribing habits
lead to ineffective and unsafe treatment, exacerbation or prolongation of illness, distress
and harm to the patient, and higher cost. The Guide to Good Prescribing; WHO; 1994,
provides medical undergraduates with important tools for training in the process of
rational prescribing.
The following steps will help to remind prescribers of the rational approach to
therapeutics.
1. Define the patient’s problem
Whenever possible, making the right diagnosis is based on integrating many pieces of
information: the complaint as described by the patient; a detailed history; physical
examination; laboratory tests; X-rays and other investigations. This will help in rational
prescribing, always bearing in mind that disease are evolutionary process.
4

Introduction to Rational Use of Medicines
2. Specify the therapeutic objective
Doctors must clearly state their therapeutic objectives based on the pathophysiology
underlying the clinical situation. Very often physicians must select more than one
therapeutic goal for each patient.
3. Selecting therapeutic strategies
The selected strategy should be discussed with the patient. The selected treatment can be
non-pharmacological and/or pharmacological; it also needs to take into account the total
cost of all therapeutic options.
a. Non-pharmacological treatment
The patient does not always need a medicine for treatment of the condition. Very often,
health problems can be resolved by a change in life style, dietary habits, use of
physiotherapy or exercise, provision of adequate psychological support and other non-
pharmacological treatments; they have the same importance as a prescription drug and
instructions must be written, explained and monitored in the same way.
b. Pharmacological treatment
Selecting the correct group of drugs
Knowledge about the pathophysiology involved in the clinical situation of each patient
and the pharmacodynamics of the chosen group of drugs, are two of the fundamental
principles for rational therapeutics.
Selecting the drug from the chosen group
The selection process must consider benefit/risk/cost information. This step is based on
evidence about maximal clinical benefits of the drug for a given indication (efficacy) with
minimum production of adverse effects (safety).
It must be remembered that each drug has adverse effects and it is estimated that up to
10% of hospital admissions in industrialized countries are due to adverse effects. Not all
drug-induced injury can be prevented but much of it is caused by inappropriate selection
of drugs.
In cost comparisons between drugs, the cost of total treatment and not only the unit cost
of the drug must be considered.
Verifying the suitability of the chosen pharmaceutical treatment of each patient
The prescriber must check suitability of the chosen active substance, its dosage form,
dosage schedule and duration of treatment are suitable for each patient. Drug treatment
should be individualized to the needs of each patient.
Prescription writing
The prescription is the link between the prescriber, the pharmacist (or dispenser) and the
patient so it is important for successful management of presenting medical condition. The
item is covered in more detail in the following section.
Giving information, instructions and warnings
This step is important to ensure patient adherence and is covered in detail in the following
section.
5

Introduction to Rational Use of Medicines
Monitoring treatment
Evaluation of the follow up and the outcome of treatment provides information whether
the patient’s problem is solved or to reformulate, if necessary. This step gives rise to
important information about the effects and adverse effects of medicines, contributing to
the evidence ofknowledge, necessaryto promote the rational use of drugs.
V. AdverseDrug Effects and Drug Interactions
Adverse drug reactions
An adverse drug reaction (ADR) may be defined as ‘A response to a drug which is
noxious, unintended and occurs at doses normally used for prophylaxis, diagnosis or
therapy of disease, or for the modification of physiological function’. ADRs are therefore
unwanted or unintended effects of a medicine, including idiosyncratic effects, which
occur during its proper use.
An adverse drug event (ADE) is defined as ‘Any untoward medical occurrence that may
present during treatment with a medicine but which does not necessarily have a causal
relationship with this treatment’.
Two types of ADRs and their differentiating characteristics have been identified. The
common, predictable, dose related reaction with low mortality is type ‘A’ ADR. For
example, anticholinergic effect of tricyclic antidepressants and digoxin toxicity. ADRs
may also be unrelated to the known pharmacological action of a drug. These are
uncommon, non-dose related bizarre ‘B’ type reactions, for example, anaphylaxis with
penicillins, malignant hyperthermia with halothane.
Thalidomide marked the first recognized public health disaster related to the
introduction of a new drug. It is now recognized that clinical trials, however through,
cannot be guaranteed to detect all adverse effects likely to be caused by a drug. Health
workers are thus encouraged to record and report to their national pharmacovigilance
centre any unexpected adverse effects with any drug to achieve faster recognition of
serious related problems. The Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO),
Director General of Health Services under the influence of Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare, has initiated a nationwide Pharmacovigilance programme for protecting the
health of the patients by assuring drug safety.
Thespecific aims and objectives of the National Pharmacovigilance Programme are:
 To monitor ADRs in Indian population.
 To create awareness amongst health care professionals about the importance of ADR
reporting in India
 To ensure that the benefits of use of medicine outweighs the risks and thus safeguard
the health of the Indian population
 To generate independent, evidence based recommendations on the safety of medicines
6

Introduction to Rational Use of Medicines
 To encourage safe, rational and cost effective use of medicines.
Under the National Coordinating Center, several ADR monitoring centers operates to
detect ADEs. These ADR monitoring centers are located at MCI approved medical
colleges and hospitals, private hospitals, public health programmes, and autonomous
institutions such as Indian Council of Medical Research etc. The ADR monitoring centers
record and analyze the ADEs and submit them to the National Coordinating center via
online reporting system known as Vigiflow.
Spontaneous reporting
Spontaneous reporting is the reporting of ADRs by healthcare professionals (and in some
countries consumers) to identify and report any suspected adverse drug reaction to a
pharmacovigilance center and/or to the manufacturer. It is one of the important methods
of collecting information about ADRs.
All suspected adverse reactions, known or unknown, serious or otherwise should be
reported. It is important to report even minor reactions of new drugs. For established
drugs, the reporting of serious ADRs is important. An increased frequency of a known
ADR to a drug is also important.
Adverse drug reactions may be reported or notified to the nearest ADR monitoring centre
under the National Pharmacovigilance Program. The Department of Pharmacology, B. J.
Medical College is one of the approved ADR monitoring center in Gujarat state. The
ADRs can be reported by the forms available at the department. Reporting is the process
of providing ADR information by filling in the ADR form appropriately giving details of
the clinical case as well as the ADR ( Appendix –I).
Major factors predisposing to adversedrug effects
It is well known that different patients often respond differently to a given treatment
regimen. For example, patients taking combinations of drugs known to interact, only a
small number show any clinical evidence of interactions. In addition to the
pharmaceutical properties of drug therefore, there are characteristics of the patient which
predispose to ADRs.
Extremes of age: The very old and the very young are more susceptible to ADRs. Drugs
which commonly cause problems in the elderly include hypnotics, diuretics, non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, antihypertensives, psychotropics and digoxin.
All children and particularly neonates, differ from adults in their response to drugs. Some
drugs are likely to cause problems in neonates (for example morphine), but are generally
tolerated in children. Other drugs (for example valproic acid) are associated with
increased risk of ADRs in children of all ages. Other drugs associated with problems in
children include chloramphenicol (Grey baby syndrome), antiarrhythmics (worsening of
arrhythmias), acetylsalicylic acid (Reye syndrome).
Intercurrent illness: If besides the condition being treated, the patient suffers from
another disease, such as kidney, liver or heart disease, special precautions may be
7

Introduction to Rational Use of Medicines
necessary to prevent ADRs. The genetic make-up of the individual patient may also
predispose to ADRs.
Drug interactions: May occur between drugs which compete for the same receptor or act
on the same physiological system. They may also occur indirectly when a drug-induced
disease or a change in fluid or electrolyte balance alters the response to another drug.
Incompatibilities between drugs and intravenous fluids
Drugs should not be added to blood, amino acid solutions or fat emulsions. Certain drugs,
when added to intravenous fluids, may be inactivated by pH changes, by precipitation or
chemical reaction. Benzylpenicillin and ampicillin lose potency after 6-8 hours if added
to dextrose solutions, due to the acidity of the solutions. Some drugs bind to plastic
containers and tubing, for example diazepam and insulin. Aminoglycosides are
incompatible with penicillins and heparin. Hydrocortisone is incompatible with heparin,
tetracycline and chloramphenicol.
Adverse effects caused by traditional medicines
Patients who have been or are taking traditional herbal remedies may develop ADRs. It is
not always easy to identify the responsible plant or plant constituent. Refer to the drug
and toxicology information service if available or to suitable literature.
The effect of food on drug absorption
Food delays gastric emptying and reduces the rate of absorption of many drugs; the total
amount of drug absorbed may or may not be reduced. However, some drugs are
preferably taken with food, either to increase absorption or to decrease the irritant effect
on the stomach.
VI.Prescription writing
A prescription is an instruction from a prescriber to a dispenser. Every country has its
own standards for the minimum information required for a prescription, and its own laws
and regulations to define which drugs require a prescription and who is entitled to write it.
Many countries have separate regulations for prescriptions for controlled drugs such as
opioid analgesics. The following guidelines will help to ensure that prescriptions are
correctly interpreted and leave no doubt the intension of the prescriber. The guidelines are
relevant for primary care prescribing; they may, however, be adapted for use in hospitals
or other specialist units.
Prescription form
The most important requirement is that the prescription be clear and legible and indicate
precisely what should be given. The local language may bepreferred.
The following details should be shown on the form:
 The prescriber’s name, address and telephone number. This will allow either the
patient or the dispenser to contact the prescriber for any clarification or potential
problem with the prescription.
8

Introduction to Rational Use of Medicines
 Date of the prescription. In many countries the validity of a prescription has no time
limit, but in some countries pharmacists do not dispense drugs on prescriptions older
than 3 to 6 months.
 Name, form and strength of the drug. The International Non-proprietary Name of the
drug should always be used. If there is a specific reason to prescribe a special brand,
the trade name can be added. Generic substitution is allowed in some countries. The
pharmaceutical form (for example ‘tablet’, ‘oral solution’, ‘eye ointment’) should also
be stated.
 The strength of the drug should be stated in standard units using abbreviations that are
consistent with the System International (SI). ‘Microgram’ and ‘nanogram’ should
not, however, be abbreviated. Also, ‘units’ should not be abbreviated. Avoid decimals
whenever possible. If unavoidable, a zero should be written in front of the decimal
point.
 Specific areas for filling in details about the patient including name, address and age.
Directions
Directions specifying the route, dose and frequency should be clear and explicit; use of
phrases such as ‘take as directed’ or ‘take as before’ should be avoided.
For preparations which are to be taken on an ‘as required’ basis, the minimum dose
interval should be stated together with, where relevant, the maximum daily dose. It is
good practice to qualify such prescriptions with the purpose of the medication (for
example ‘every 6 hours as required for pain’, ‘at night as required to sleep’).
It is good practice to explain the directions to the patient; these directions will then be
reinforced by the label on the medicinal product and possibly by appropriate counseling
by the dispenser. It may be worthwhile giving a written note for complicated regimens
although it must be borne in mind that the patient may lose the separate note.
Quantity to be dispensed
The quantity of the medicinal product to be supplied should be stated such that it is not
confused with either the strength of the product or the dosage directions.
Alternatively, the length of the treatment course may be stated (for example ‘for 5 days’).
Wherever possible, the quantity should be adjusted to match the pack sizes available.
For liquid preparations the quantity should be stated in milliliters (abbreviated as ‘ml’) or
litres (preferably not abbreviated since the letter ‘l’ could be confused with the figure ‘1’).
Narcotics and controlled substances
The prescribing of a medicinal product that is liable to abuse requires special attention
and may be subject to specific statutory requirements. Practitioners may need to be
authorized to prescribe controlled substances; in such cases it might be necessary to
indicate details of authority on the prescription.
In particular, the strength, directions and the quantity of the controlled substance to be
dispensed should be stated clearly, with all quantities written in words as well as in
9

Introduction to Rational Use of Medicines
figures to prevent alteration. Other details such as patient particulars and date should also
be filled in carefully to avoid alteration.
References
1. The Guide to Good Prescribing;Geneva: WHO; 1994
2. WH0 Model Formulary 2008.
3. www.cdsco.nic.in/pharmacovigilance.htm
10