Chapter 2
COMMON CONDITIONS
FEVER
A body temperature greater than 37.7°C is defined as fever. Fever may be continuous,
intermittent or remittent.
Investigations
A meticulous history of chronology of symptoms, any associated focal symptom(s), exposure to
infectious agents and occupational history may be useful. A thorough physical examination
repeated on a regular basis may provide potentially diagnostic clues.
 If there are no clinical clues, the tests include a complete haemogram with ESR, smear for
malaria parasite, blood culture, Widal test and urine analysis including urine culture.
 If the febrile illness is prolonged to more than 2 weeks, an X-ray chest is indicated even in
the absence of respiratory symptoms. Any abnormal fluid collection should be sampled.
Treatment
Routine use of antipyretics in low-grade fever is not justified. This may mask important clinical
indications. However, in acute febrile illnesses suggestive of viral or bacterial cause, fever
should be treated.
Non pharmacological treatment
Hydrotherapy and rest
Pharmacological treatment
Non-specific
 Tab. paracetamol 500-1000 mg 6-8 hourly. Or Tab. ibuprofen 400-600 mg 8 hourly.
Specific
 Antibiotics/antimalarials depending upon the cause suggested by clinical and laboratory
evaluation.
Outcome
In most cases of fever, patient may either recover spontaneously or a diagnosis is reached after
repeated clinical evaluation and investigations. If no diagnosis is reached in up to 3 weeks,
patient is said to be having fever of unknown origin (FUO) and should be managed accordingly.
Patient education
 Self medication should be avoided.
 Antibiotics should be taken only on advice of a physician.
 Avoid covering the patient having high fever with blanket etc.
 Plenty of fluids should be taken. Stay in cool environment. Cold sponging of face and limbs
should bedone repeatedly.
11

Common Conditions
References
1. Alterations in Body Temperature. In: Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine. Kasper DL, Braunwald E,
Fauci AS et al (eds), 16th Edition, 2005, McGraw Hill Company Inc., New York, pp 104-25.
2. Physiological Changes in Infected Patients. In: Oxford Textbook of Medicine. Warrell DA, Cox TM, Firth
JD, Benz EJ Jr (eds), 4th Edition, 2003. Oxford University Press, 1289-92.
FEVER OF UNKNOWN ORIGIN (FUO)
FUO is defined as the presence of fever of 38.3°C or more recorded on several occasions,
evolving for at least 3 weeks with no diagnosis reached even after one week of relevant and
intelligent investigations. FUO is usually an uncommon presentation of common diseases.
Salient features
 Common causes include
- Infections, particularly extrapulmonary tuberculosis, typical and atypical mycobacterial
infections, Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, toxoplasmosis, lymphoma etc. In neutropenic
patients, gram negative bacterial, staphylococcal and fungal infections are important causes.
- Neoplastic conditions
- Noninfectious inflammatory causes collagen vascular diseases, drug fevers
 Prolonged unexplained fever, often with no localizing clue on history, physical examination
and basic laboratory investigations.
Investigations
 A detailed clinical history, repeated physical examination to provide potentially
diagnostic clues (PDC).
 No single algorithmic approach to diagnosis can be recommended for all patients of FUO
and diagnostic approach needs to be individualized.
 A complete haemogram including peripheral blood smear for malaria parasite, serum
biochemistry particularly liver function tests, a tuberculin test and an X-ray of chest
should be done in every patient with prolonged fever.
 Other investigations which are often helpful include tests related to collagen vascular
diseases, an ultrasonography to localize intra-abdominal foci of infections and a contrast
enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of chest and abdomen in detecting mediastinal
lymph nodes and parenchymal lung abnormalities not seen on conventional chest X-ray.
 Further, diagnostic approach should take into consideration the PDCs from the evaluation
of history, results of repeated physical examination, basic investigations and any
investigations done prior to this episode. If any abnormal or doubtful lesion is detected
FNAC/biopsy should be obtained.
Treatment
Sometimes evaluation may need discontinuation of all drugs being taken by the patient to rule
out drug fever as the cause of FUO.
Symptomatic treatment for fever (for details see section on fever)
12

Common Conditions
 Cold sponging may be done if fever produces discomfort. The emphasis in patients with
classic FUO is on continued observation and examination.
 (Caution: Avoid 'shotgun' trials. Empirical therapies consisting of therapeutic trials
commonly used in patients with FUO are: antibiotics, anti-tubercular treatment (ATT)
and corticosteroids).
 The ability of glucocorticoids and NSAIDs to mask fever while permitting the spread of
infection dictates that their use should be avoided unless infection has been largely ruled
out.
 If on the basis of clinical evaluation and inability to reach a definitive diagnosis, a
therapeutic trial is started, the following principles must be kept in mind:
- Give only one set of trial at a given time
- The doses of drugs and period of therapeutic trial must be adequate-
- The patient must be followed closely for response
Patient education
 Self medication should be avoided.
 Antibiotics should be taken only on advice of a physician.
 Plenty of fluids should be taken. Stay in a cool environment.
ACUTE RHEUMATIC FEVER
Rheumatic fever is due to an autoimmune reaction to group streptococci and involves many
organs, primarily the heart, the joints and the central nervous system.
Salient features
 Major criteria are pancarditis, polyarthritis, chorea, erythema marginatum and subcutaneous
nodule.
 Minor criteria are arthralgia,fever,raised PR interval.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Bed rest for two weeks followed by gradual ambulation
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. penicillin V 500 mg BD for 10 days or Inj. benzathine penicillin G- 1.2 million
units in single does or Tab. erythromycin 250 mg QID for 10 days – if patient is allergic
to penicillin.
 For secondary prophylaxis for rheumatic fever, give Inj. benzathine penicillin 1.2 million
units every 3 weeks or Tab. penicillin V 250 mg BD daily or Tab. erythromycin 250 mg
twice daily.
 Duration of prophylaxis is given in Table 1.
13

Common Conditions
Table 1. Duration of secondary prophylaxis in acute rheumatic fever
Category of Patient Duration of Prophylaxis
For 5 years after the last attack or 21 years of
Rheumatic fever without carditis
age (whichever is longer).
Rheumatic fever with carditis but no For 10 years after the last attack, or 21 years of
residual valvular disease age (whichever is longer).
Rheumatic fever with persistent valvular For 10 years after the last attack, or 40 years of
disease, evident clinically or on age (whichever is longer). Sometimes lifelong
echocardiography prophylaxis may be required.
 Arthritis: Tab. aspirin 2 g QID in adults and 80-100 mg/kg/day in children till symptoms
persist or Tab. naproxen: 10-20 mg/kg/day can also be used.
 Carditis: Tab. prednisolone 1-2 mg/kg/day can be used for short periods or up to a
maximum of 3 weeks.
 Chorea: It occurs as a long term sequelae (3-6 months). Carbamazepine or sodium
valproate is preferred to haloperidol (0.05 mg/kg/day) to reduce the abnormal movements
but response may take up to 2 weeks. Treatment should continue up to 1-2 weeks after
symptoms subside.
ANAEMIA
Anaemia is defined as a low haemoglobin level (less than 13.5 g/dl in males and less than
13.5 gm/dl in females). The common causes of anaemia in India includes,reduced production
due to deficiency of iron, folic acid, rarely vitamin B , or an ineffective erythropoiesis
12
secondary to many causes (anaemia of chronic disease, secondary to infections and
inflammation, endocrinal disorders, primary bone marrow disorders like infiltration or
hypoplasia), blood loss (which also leads to iron deficiency) and increased destruction of
RBCs (haemolysis due to many causes of which thalassaemia is the commonest).
14

Common Conditions
Salient features
 Tiredness, weakness and lack of desire to work.
 Nails and tongue look pale. Severe anaemia produces general pallor and swelling of feet.
 Most aetiologies may be determined on the basis of MCV performed in an accurate cell
counter as follows:
 Low MCV- Iron deficiency or haemoglobfnopathy like thalassaemia.
 High MCV - Folic acid or B deficiency. Less commonly alcohol intake, liver disease,
12
haemolysis and hypothyroidism.
 Normal MCV - Anaemia of chronic disease, primary bone marrow disorders, renal
failure, haemolysis.
 In case of associated leucocyte and platelet abnormalities or if anaemia does not respond
to therapy in 4 weeks despite correcting the apparent cause, a bone marrow examination
by aspiration/biopsy should be performed.
Pharmacological treatment
Iron deficiency anaemia
 Treat the underlying cause: menorrhagia in women, gastrointestinal blood loss in all age
groups including hookworm infestation, dietary deficiency, rarely malabsorption.
 Tab. ferrous sulfate 200 mg 3 times a day.
 Reduce the dose as haemoglobin rises to over 10 g/dl. Once haemoglobin is normal,
continue with 1 tablet daily for at least three months.
 Other preparations of iron are not superior, but they can be tried if patient does not find
ferrous sulfate suitable. These include ferrous fumarate and ferrous gluconate. The rate of
rise of haemoglobin should be 1 g/dl per week.
 If this does not occur, consider ongoing blood loss, noncompliance, and associated
haemoglobinopathy like thalassaemia carrier status, malabsorption, or an incorrect
diagnosis.
 Parenteral iron does not lead to a faster rise in haemoglobin. It is indicated in the
following situations: (i) malabsorption of iron, (ii) intolerance of oral iron, (iii) in late
pregnancy to ensure that foetal stores of iron are replenished rapidly, (iv) if ongoing
blood loss exceeds the capacity to absorb oral iron (like in inoperable malignancy) and (v)
in noncompliant patient. There is danger of anaphylactoid reactions; hence facilities to
manage these should be readily available.
Folic acid deficiency
 Treat the cause: Dietary deficiency, increased requirement as in pregnancy and children,
haemolytic anaemia.
 Tab. folic acid 5 mg daily. This dose is adequate even in malabsorption syndrome.
Vitamin B deficiency
12
15

Common Conditions
 Treat the cause: Dietary deficiency in vegetarians, pernicious anaemia. Although
uncommon, it is also under diagnosed due to lack of facilities.
 Tab. vitamin B complex, as in haematinic tablets. Or Inj. B 1000 mcg IM, one injection
12
on alternate days for total 5 injections, then once a week for 5 weeks, then once in 3 to 6
months will be adequate for most patients.
Patient education
 Educate the patient about preventive measures for worm infestation.
 Inform about importance of taking adequate food with green leafy vegetables to meet the
nutritional requirement.
 Cooking food in iron utensils may increase iron content in the diet.
 Instruct the patient to take iron tablets after food; iron tablets sometimes produce stomach
upset.
 Inform the patient that the stools could turn black during iron therapy
 Reduce the dose of iron if it produces stomach ache, diarrhoea or constipation.
 Explain that the response to iron therapy is gradual and it takes weeks or months for
blood to become normal. Continue iron tablets for six months.
 Keep iron tablets out of the reach of children. They may swallow the tablets as candies
causing adverse reactions including death.
TYPHOID FEVER
It is caused by Salmonella typhi and Salmonella paratyphi. Salmonella typhi causes a variety
of illnesses including asymptomatic carrier state, gastro-enteritis and enteric fever.
Salient features
 The onset of fever is typically gradual, continuous (temperature upto 40º C)
constitutional symptoms such as malaise, anorexia, lethargy, headache.
 Constipation or diarrhea (pea-soup stools) which may be associated with abdominal
pain and tenderness.
 Hepatomegaly and splenomegalymay be observed.
 Complications such as hepatitis, meningitis, pneumonitis and myocarditis can occur
after the first week.
Investigations
 Diagnosis is suggested by
- Rising of O antibodies (Widal test) and
- Confirmed by isolation of organism in blood, bone marrow, urine or stool
Pharmacological treatment
 Most patients with uncomplicated enteric fever can be managed at home with oral
antibiotics and antipyretics.
16

Common Conditions
 Patients with persistent vomiting, diarrhea, and/or abdominal distension should be
hospitalized and given supportive therapy as well as a parenteral third-generation
cephalosporin or fluoroquinolone, depending on the susceptibility profile (Table 2).
 Therapy should be administered for at least 10 days or for 5 days after fever resolution.
Table 2. Dosage schedule of antibiotics in treatment of typhoid fever
Indication Agent Dosage (Route) Duration, Days
Empirical Ceftriaxonea 1-2 g/d IV 7–14
Treatment
Fully Ciprofloxacinb (first line) 500 mg BD (PO) or 400 5–7
Susceptible mgBD (IV)
Amoxicillin (second line) 1 g TDS (PO) or 2 g QID 14
(IV)
Chloramphenicol 25 mg/kg TDS (PO or IV) 14–21
Trimethoprim- 160/800 mg BD (PO) 7–14
sulfamethoxazole
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg BD (PO) or 400 5–7
mg BD (IV)
Multidrug- Ceftriaxone 2–3 g/day (IV) 7–14
Resistant Azithromycin 1 g/day (PO)c 5
Ceftriaxone 2–3 g/d (IV) 7–14
Azithromycin 1 g/d (PO) 5
Nalidixic Acid– High-dose ciprofloxacin 750 mg bid (PO) or 400 10–14
Resistant mg q8h (IV)
aOr another third-generation cephalosporin [e.g., cefotaxime, 2 g TDS (IV); or cefixime, 400 mg
bid (PO)].
bOr ofloxacin 400 mg bid (PO) for 2–5 days.
cOr 1 g on day 1 followed by 500 mg/day PO for 6 days.
 The 1–5% of patients who develop chronic carriage of Salmonella can be treated for 4–6
weeks with an appropriate oral antibiotic.
 Treatment with oral amoxicillin, cotrimoxazole, ciprofloxacin, or norfloxacin is 80%
effective in eradicating chronic carriage of susceptible organisms.
 However, in cases of anatomic abnormality (e.g., biliary or kidney stones), eradication
often requires both antibiotic therapy and surgical correction.
17

Common Conditions
MALARIA
Parastitic infection due to protozoa of genus Plasmodium transmitted by the female anopheles
mosquito. There are four plasmodia species: Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium vivax,
Plasmodium malaria, Plasmodium ovale.
Salient features
 It is an acute and chronic illness characterized by paroxysms of fever, chills, sweats,
fatigue, anemia and splenomegaly. P. falciparum malaria (severe and complicated
malaria) is associated in varying degrees with the following clinical signs.
 Symptoms of cerebral malaria include mental clouding, coma, convulsions, delirium
and occasionally localizing signs, hyperpyrexia (more than 40.5ºC), haemolysis,
oliguria, anuria, pulmonary edema andmacroscopic haemoglobinuria.
Investigations
Diagnosis is made by presence of protozoa in the blood in thick and thin smear slides (thick
smear for easy detection of parasite and thin smear for identification of species).
Note: That blood films may be negative even in a severe attack because of parasites in the
deep capillaries.
Pharmacological treatment (Figure 1, 2 and 3)
Figure1. Treatment where microscopy result is available within 24 hours
18

Common Conditions
Figure2. Treatment where microscopy result is not available within 24 hours and
monovalent RDT is used
Figure3. Treatment where microscopy result is not available within 24 hours and
bivalent RDT is used
19

Common Conditions
Treatment of P.vivax malaria
 Tab. chloroquine: 25 mg/kg body weight divided over three days i.e.
 10 mg/kg on day 1
 10 mg/kg on day 2
 5 mg/kg on day 3
 Tab. primaquine: 0.25 mg/kg body weight daily for 14 days.
 Primaquine is contraindicated in infants, pregnant women and individuals with G6PD
deficiency. 14 day regimen of primaquine should be given under supervision.
Treatment of P.falciparum malaria
 Artemisinin based Combination Therapy (ACT-SP) –Tab.artesunate 4 mg/kg body weight
daily for 3 days plus sulfadoxine (25 mg/kg body weight) - pyrimethamine (1.25 mg/kg
body weight) on first day.
 Tab.primaquine:0.75 mg/kg body weight on day 2
Treatment of mixed infections (P.vivax +P.falciparum) cases
All mixed infections should be treated with full course of ACT and primaquine 0.25 mg per
kg body weight daily for 14 days (Table 3).
Table 3. Dosage schedule for treatment of mixed infection (P.vivax +P.falciparum)
Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Days 4-14
AS SP PQ AS tablet PQ AS tablet PQ PQ
Age
(50 mg) (500 mg + (2.5 mg) (50 mg) (2.5 mg) (50 mg) (2.5 mg) (2.5 mg)
25 mg)
Less than 1 yr
1/2 1/2 0 1/2 0 1/2 0 0
1-4 years 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
5-8 years 2 1 .5 2 2 2 2 2 2
9-14 years
3 2 4 3 4 3 4 4
15 yrs or more 4 3 6 4 6 4 6 6
AS–artesunate, SP–sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, PQ-primaquine
20

Common Conditions
Treatment of complicated or severe malaria (Table 4)
Table 4. Treatment of severe and complicated malaria
Initial parenteral treatment for at least 48hrs. Follow-up treatment, when patient
Choose any one of the following can take oral medications following
parenteral treatment
Quinine: 20mg quinine salt/kg body weight Quinine10 mg/kg three times a day
on admission (IV infusion or divided IM injection) plus doxycycline 100 mg once a day
followed by maintenance dose of 10 mg/kg 8 hourly; orclindamycin in pregnant women
infusion rate should not exceed 5 mg/kg per hour. and children under 8 years of age, to
Loading dose of20mg/kg should not be given, if the complete 7 days of treatment.
patient has already received quinine.
Artesunate: 2.4 mg/kg IV or IM given on admission, Treat with: ACT-SP for 3 days + PQ
then at 12 h and 24 h, then once a day or single dose on second day to
Artemether: 3.2 mg/kg IM given on admission then complete 7 days of treatment.
1.6 mg/kg per dayor
Arteether: 150 mg daily IM for 3 days in adults only
(not recommended for children).
Note: The parenteral treatment in severe malaria cases should be given for minimum of 24 hours once started
(irrespective of the patient's ability to tolerate oral medication earlier than 24 hours).
Chemoprophylaxis of malaria
Short term chemoprophylaxis (up to 6 weeks)
Doxycycline: 100 mg once daily for adults and 1.5 mg/kg once daily for children
(contraindicated in children below 8 years). The drug should be started 2 days before travel
andcontinued for 4 weeks after leaving the malarious area.
Chemoprophylaxis for longer stay (more than 6 weeks)
Mefloquine: 250 mg weekly for adults and should be administered two weeks before, during
and four weeks after exposure.
DENGUE
Dengue is the most important emerging tropical viral disease of human beings in the world
today. All four dengue virus (Dengue 1, 2, 3 and 4) infections may be asymptomatic, may
lead to dengue fever (DF), dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) or when associated with plasma
leakage maylead to hypovolemic shock and dengue shock syndrome (DSS).
21

Common Conditions
Salient features
 Dengue fever is an acute febrile illness of 2-7 days with two or more of the following
manifestations. Headache, retro orbital pain, myalgia, arthralgia, rash.
 Hemorrhagic manifestation (petechiae and positive tourniquet test) and Leucopenia
Dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF),if one or more of the following are present
 Positive tourniquet test
 Petechiae, purpura or ecchymosis
 Bleeding from mucosa
 Haematemesis, melena
 Thrombocytopenia (platelets 100,000 cells/mm3 or less) and evidence of plasma leakage.
Dengue shock syndrome (DSS)
 All the above criteria of DHF plus signs of circulatory failure.
Notes: The tourniquet test is performed by inflating a blood pressure cuff to mid way
between the systolic and diastolic pressure.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Bed rest is advisable during the acute phase.
 Use cold sponging to keep temperature below 39ºC
Pharmacological treatment
 Management ofdengue fever is symptomatic and supportive
 Antipyretics may be used to lower the body temperature. Aspirin/NSAIDs like ibuprofen
etc should be avoided since it may cause gastritis, vomiting, acidosis and platelet
dysfunction.
 Paracetamol is preferable in the doses as follows: 1-2 years: 60 –120 mg/doses, 3-6 years:
120 mg/dose,7-12 years: 240 mg/dose,Adult : 500mg/dose
Note: In children the dose is calculated as per 10mg/kg body weight per dose which can
be repeated at the interval of 6 hrs.
 Oral fluid and electrolyte therapy are recommended for patients with excessive sweating
or vomiting.
 Patients should be monitored in DHF endemic area until they become afebrile for one
day without the use of antipyretics and after platelet and haematocrit determinations are
stable, platelet count is more than 50,000/mm3.
Management of Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever (Febrile Phase)
 The management of febrile phase is similar to that of DF.
 Paracetamol is recommended to keep the temperature below 39OC. Copious amount of
fluid should be given orally, to the extent the patient tolerates, oral hydration solution
(ORS), such as those used for the treatment of diarrhoeal diseases and/or fruit juices are
preferable to plain water
22

Common Conditions
 IV fluid may be administered if the patient is vomiting persistently or refusing to feed.
 Patients should be closely monitored for the initial signs of shock. The critical period is
during the transition from the febrile to the afebrile stage and usually occurs after the
third day of illness.
 Serial haematocrit determinations are essential guide for treatment, since they reflect the
degree of plasma leakage and need for intravenous administration of fluids.
 Haematocrit should be determined daily from the third day until the temperature has
remained normal for one or two days. If haematocrit determination is not possible,
haemoglobin determination may be carried out as an alternative.
 The details of IV treatment when required for patients are given in Figure 4.
Figure 4. Treatment algorithm of dengue
23

Common Conditions
Management of DHF Grade I and Grade II:
 Any person who has dengue fever with thrombocytopenia and haemoconcentration and
presents with abdominal pain, black tarry stools, epistaxis, bleeding from the gums and
infection etc needs to be hospitalized.
 All these patients should be observed for signs of shock. The critical period for
development of shock is transition from febrile to abferile phase of illness, which usually
occurs after third day of illness.
 A rise of haemoconcentration indicates need for IV fluid therapy. If despite the treatment,
the patient develops fall in BP, decrease in urine output or other features of shock, the
management for Grade III/IV DHF/DSS should be instituted.
 Oral rehydration should be given along with antipyretics like paracetamol sponging, etc.
as described above.
 The detailed treatment for patient with DHF Grade I and II is given at Figure 5. Common
signs of complications are observed during the afebrile phase of DHF. Immediately after
hospitalization, the haematocrit, platelet count and vital signs should be examined to
assess the patient’s condition and intravenous fluid therapy should be started. The patient
requires regular and sustained monitoring.
Figure 5. Volume replacement flow chart for patients with dengue haemorrhagic fever
grade I and II
24

Common Conditions
Fluid requirement
 The volume of fluid required to be replaced should be just sufficient to maintain effective
circulation during the period of plasma leakage. To ensure adequate fluid replacement
and avoid over-fluid infusion, the rate of intravenous fluid should be adjusted throughout
the 24 to 48 hour period of plasma leakage by periodic haematocrit determinations and
assessment of vital signs.
 The required regimen of fluid should be calculated on the basis of body weight and
charted on a 1-3 hourly basis, or more frequently in the case of shock. The flow of fluid
and the time of infusion are dependent on the severity of DHF. The schedule given below
is a guideline and calculated for moderate dehydration of about 6% deficit (plus
maintenance) (Table 5).
Table 5. Fluid requirement as per body weight of the patient
Weight on Fluid requirement/kg body
admission (kg) weight/day (ml/kg)
<7 220
7-11 165
12-18 130
>18 90
 In older children who weigh more than 40 kg, the volume needed for 24 hours should be
calculated as twice that required for maintenance (using the Holiday and Segar formula).
The maintenance fluid should be calculated as follows:
Table 6. Maintenance fluid requirement according to Holiday and Segar formula
Body weight in kg Maintenance volume for 24 hours
<10kg 100 ml / kg
10-20kg 1000+50 ml / kg
>20kg 1500+20 ml / kg
For a child weighing 40 kgs, the maintenance is: 1500 + (20x20) = 1900 ml. This means that
the child requires 3800 ml IV fluid during 24 hours.
Indications of red cell transfusion
 Loss of blood (overt blood) -10% or more of total blood volume
 Preferably whole blood/ component to be used
 Refractory shock despite adequate fluid administration and declining haematocrit -
replacement volume should be 10 ml/kg body wt at a time and coagulogram should be
done.
25

Common Conditions
 If fluid overload is present,PCV is to be given
Indications of platelet transfusion
 In general there is no need to give prophylactic platelets even at less than 20,000
cells/mm3.
 Prophylactic platelet transfusion may be given at level of less than 10,000 cells/mm3 in
absence of bleeding manifestations.
 Prolonged shock; with coagulopathy and abnormal coagulogram.
 In case of systemic massive bleeding, platelet transfusion may be needed in addition to
red cell transfusion.
CHIKUNGUNYA
Chikungunya is caused by an alpha virus closely related to O’ nyong–nyong virus. The main
vector is Aedes aegypti mosquito.
Salient features
 Acute self limiting illness Incubation period is of 2 to 4 days. Abrupt onset presenting
as fever with severe joint pain
 After 1 –4 days, fever subsides, there will be a afebrileperiod 3 days, fever returns with
an itching maculopapular rash on trunk and extensor surfaces of limbs.
 Afteranother3-6 days fever subsides and there is complete recovery.
 Cripping arthropathy can occur intermittently for upto 4 months, in some cases even
upto 5 years.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Mild exercises and physiotherapy may be suggested in recovering persons.
 Exposure to warm environment may be suggested
 Non weight bearing exercises
 Surgery in severely damaged joints
Pharmacological treatment
 Acute stage of illness
 Treat symptomatically (Tab. paracetamol 1 gm 3-4 times a day for fever, headache and
pain.)
 Avoid aspirin and steroid because of risk of GI side effects and Reye’s syndrome with
aspirin.
 Tab. hydroxychloroquinine 200mg orally once daily or Tab. chloroquinine phosphate
300mg per day for a period of 4 weeks in cases where arthralgia is refractory to other
drugs.
 Sideeffects of hydroxychloroquinine include retinal damage andelevated liver enzymes.
26

Common Conditions
TUBERCULOSIS
Salient features
Pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB): The most common symptom of PTB is a persistent cough
of two weeks or more, with or without expectoration. It may be accompanied by one or
more of the following symptoms,
 Fever, night sweats, weight loss
 Chest pain, hemoptysis, shortness of breath, tiredness and loss of appetite
Such patients should be selected and subjected for sputum examination. This enhances the
chances of detection of the bacilli in the smear microscopy.
Extra pulmonary tuberculosis: A person with extra-pulmonary TB may have symptoms
related to the organs affected along with constitutional symptoms stated above.
 Enlarged cervical lymph nodes with or without discharging sinuses (TB Lymphadenitis)
 Chest pain with or without dyspnoea in pleural TB
 Pain and swelling of the joints in bone tuberculosis (fever, backache, deformity in spinal
TB).
 Signs of raised intra-cranial tension like irritability, headache, vomiting, fever, stiffness
of the neck and mental confusion in TB meningitis
 Painless haematuria or sterile pyuria in renal tuberculosis and, infertility in genito-
urinary TB.
Investigations
 Pulmonary TB in adults (Figure 6)
Sputum smear microscopy
Chest x-ray
-
Sputum culture and drug sensitivity testing(DST) for diagnosis of Drug Resistant TB.
-
Newer rapid diagnostic tools for detection of multi drug resistant (MDR) TB.
-
Newer tools under evaluation for diagnosis of MDR/XDR TB
-
-
27

Common Conditions
Figure6. Algorithm for diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis
 Paediatric TB patients (Figure 7)
In all children with presumptive intra-thoracic TB, microbiological confirmation
should be sought through examination of respiratory specimens (like sputum by
-
expectoration, gastric aspirate, induced sputum, bronchio-alveolar lavage or any other
appropriate specimen) with diagnostic test like smear microscopy or rapid molecular
test or culture.
In the event of negative or unavailable microbiological results, a diagnosis of
probable TB in children should be based on the presence of abnormalities consistent
-
with TB on radiography, a history of exposure to an infectious case, evidence of TB
infection and clinical findings suggestive of TB.
For children with presumptive extra-pulmonary TB, appropriate specimens from the
presumed sites of involvement should be obtained for microscopy, culture and DST,
-
rapid molecular test and histopathological examination.
28

Common Conditions
Figure7. Diagnostic algorithm for pediatric pulmonary tuberculosis
 Extra-pulmonary TB
Demonstration of AFB bacilli in a smear from extra pulmonary site is often difficult
because of low bacillary load. The clinical features pertaining to the system affected
-
should be considered in the diagnosis of extra pulmonary tuberculosis.
However, the following are some of the special investigations which are helpful in
diagnosing extra pulmonary tuberculosis. These may be radiological, cytological /
-
pathological, biochemical and immunological (Figure 8).
(a) Fine Needle Aspirations Cytology and direct smear examination
(b) Excision / Biopsy of specimen for histopathological examination
(c) Fluid for cytology , biochemical analysis and smear examination
(d) X-ray of the involved region
(e) Ultrasonography for abdominal tuberculosis
(f) Culture forMycobacterium tuberculosis
(g) Computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
29

Common Conditions
Figure8. Diagnostic algorithm for TB lymphadenitis
 Diagnosis of Pleural TB
Tubercular pleural effusion is considered as extra pulmonary tuberculosis. TB
Patients presenting with chest pain with or without difficulty in breathing for more
-
than two weeks should be referred for chest radiograph.
In pleural effusion, chest X-ray features may include obliteration of costophrenic
angle and varying degree of effusion.
-
Biochemical and cytological analysis of the aspirated pleura fluid will help in
confirming the diagnosis. Pleural fluid is generally an exudate with mainly
-
lymphocytes and few mesothelial cells.
Pleural biopsy is confirmatory in a high proportion of patients.
-
Pharmacological treatment
Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme (RNTCP) uses short course
chemotherapy given intermittently - thrice weekly under Direct Observation for both
pulmonary and extra pulmonary tuberculosis patients.
Treatment regimens
For the purpose of treatment regimen to be used, TB patients are classified into two groups,
namely, “New” or “Previously Treated”, based on the history of previous treatment.
30

Common Conditions
 Regimen for New cases: This regimen is prescribed to all new pulmonary (smear
positive and negative) and extra pulmonary tuberculosis. The regimen is 2H R Z E / 4
3 3 3 3
H R .
3 3
 Regimen for Previously Treated cases: This regimen is prescribed for TB patients who
have had more than one month anti-tuberculosis treatment previously. These patients are
at a higher risk of having drug resistance. Hence, 5 drugs are prescribed in the intensive
phase and the total duration of treatment is 8 months. Relapses, treatment after Default,
Failures and Others are treated with this regimen. The regimen is 2S H R Z E / 1H R Z
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
E / 5 H R E . The table below indicates the treatment regimen, type of patients and
3 3 3 3
regimens prescribed (Table 6).
Table6. Treatment regimens recommended by RNTCP for treatment of Tuberculosis
Treatment Type of patient Regimen1
groups
Intensive Continuation
Phase (IP) Phase (CP)
New* Sputum smear-positive 2H R Z E 4H R
3 3 3 3 3 3
Sputum smear-negative
Extra-pulmonary
Others
Previously Smear-positive relapse 2H R Z E S 5H R E
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
Treated** Smear-positive failure / 1H R Z E
3 3 3 3
Smear-positive treatment after default
Others1
* New includes former categories I and III
** Previously treated is former category II.
1 - In rare and exceptional cases, patients who are sputum smear-negative or who have extra-
pulmonary disease can have recurrence or non-response. This diagnosis in all such cases
should always be made by an MO and should be supported by culture or histological
evidence of current, active TB. In these cases, the patient should be typed as ‘Others’ and
given treatment regimen for previously treated
 The number before the letters refers to the number of months of treatment. The subscript
after the letters refers to the number of doses per week.
 The dosage strengths are as follows: isoniazid (H) 600 mg, rifampicin (R) 450 mg,
pyrazinamide (Z) 1500 mg, ethambutol (E) 1200 mg, streptomycin (S) 750 mg.
 Patients who weigh 60 kg or more receive additional rifampicin 150 mg.
 Patients more than 50 years old receive streptomycin 500 mg. Patients who weigh less
than 30kg, receive drugs as per paediatric weight band boxes according to body weight
(Table 7).
31

Common Conditions
Table 7. Drug dosages for adults in the blister packs
Dose Number of tablets in blister
Drugs
(thrice a week) pack
Isoniazid (H) 600mg 2 x 300 mg
Rifampicin (R) 450mg 1 x 450 mg
Pyrazinamide (Z) 1500mg 2 x 750 mg
Ethambutol (E) 1200mg 2 x 600 mg
Streptomycin (S) 0.75g -
 Treatment of Pediatric TB (Table 8, 9 and 10, Figure 9)
Pediatric cases are to be treated under RNTCP with the same thrice weekly short course
chemotherapy regimens (“New” or “Previously treated”) given under Directly Observed
Treatment Short Course (DOTS) as for adult patients. They are to be registered in the
respective RNTCP TB Register. Pediatric patient-wise boxes are available with different
dosages under two weight bands for children weighing 6 to 10 kg and 11 to 17 kg.
Wherever possible, before a child is started on the “Previously Treated” regimen, she/he
should be examined by a pediatrician or TB expert.
Table8. Pediatric patient wise boxes (PWB) with dosages
Product code(PC)-13 Product code(PC)-14 PC-15 PC-16
DRUGS IP CP IP CP
12 blisters 12 blisters
24 blisters 18blisters 24 blisters 18 blister
Isoniazid 75mg 75mg 150mg 150mg
Prolongation Prolongation
Rifampicin 75mg 75mg 150mg 150mg
of IP for PC of IP for PC
Pyrazinamide 250mg 500mg
13 14
Ethambutol 200mg 400mg
IP – Intensive phase, CP –Continuation phase
Table9. Pediatric patient wise boxes (PWB) for new cases according to weight band
For New cases Prolongation of IP
Weight band
IP CP
6-10 Kg PC 13 PC 15
11-17 Kg PC 14 PC 16
18-25 Kg PC 13 + PC 14 PC 15 + PC16
26-30 kg* PC 14 x 2 PC 16 x 2
* For children weighing >30 kgs, adult PWB are to be used
IP – Intensive phase,CP –Continuation phase
32

Common Conditions
Table10. Pediatric patient wise boxes for previously treated cases according to weight
band
For previously treated cases Prolongation
Weight
IP (Intensive phase) CP (Continuation phase) of IP
(PC 13+ PC15) (PC 13 + 54 Tab E 200 mg) PC 15
6-10 Kg + +
(24 vials Inj sm*) (PC 15 without Z)
(PC 14 + PC16) (PC 14 + 54 E 400 mg) PC 16
11-17 Kg + +
(24 vials Inj sm*) (PC 16 without Z)
(PC 13 + PC 14 + PC 15 (PC 13 + PC14 + 54 Tab E 600 mg) PC 15 + PC
+ PC 16) + 16
18-25 Kg
+ (PC 15+ PC 16 without Z)
(24 vials Inj sm*)
(PC 14 x 2)+ (PC 16 x 2) (PC 14 x 2+ 54 Tab E 800 mg) PC 16 x 2
26-30 kg + +
(24 vials Inj sm*) (PC 16 x 2 without Z)
* Injection streptomycin 15mg/kg body weight
Figure 9. Clinical monitoring of children with Tuberculosis
33

Common Conditions
Non DOTS (ND) treatment regimen under RNTCP
In rare and exceptional situations, non-DOTS treatment (with a self-administered non-
rifampicin containing regimen) may be needed in a few TB cases. Examples include:
Those with adverse reactions to rifampicin and / or pyrazinamide
“New” patients who refuse DOTS despite all efforts
-
This is a treatment regimen of 12-month duration comprising 2 months of SHE and 10
-
months of HE (2SHE / 10HE). Dosages administered per day in the regimen are:
Isoniazid - 300 mg
Ethambutol - 800 mg
Streptomycin - 750 mg (500 mg for those >50 years of age)
Those who weigh less than 30 kg receive dosages calculated as per body-weight.
 Drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR/XDR-TB)
MDR TB suspect: A patient suspected of drug-resistant tuberculosis, based on RNTCP
criteria for submission of specimens for drug-susceptibility testing.
MDR TB suspect criteria
Criteria A
All failures of new TB cases
Smear positive previously treated cases who remain smear positive at 4th month
-
onwards
-
All pulmonary TB cases who are contacts of known MDR TB case
Criteria B (in addition to Criteria A)
-
All smear positive previously treated pulmonary TB cases at diagnosis
Any smear positive follow up result in new or previously treated cases
-
Criteria C (in addition to Criteria B)
-
All smear negative previously treated pulmonary TB cases at diagnosis,
HIV TB co-infected cases at diagnosis
-
In other words, for districts implementing MDR Suspect Criteria B, any smear-positive
-
diagnostic (except in a new patient) or any smear-positive follow-up result, should prompt a
referral for DST.
MDR-TB case: A TB patient whose sputum is culture positive for Mycobacterium
tuberculosis and is resistant in-vitro to isoniazid and rifampicin with or without other anti-
tubercular drugs based on DST results from an RNTCP-certified culture and DST laboratory
Extensive Drug Resistant Tuberculosis (XDR TB) case: An MDR TB case whose
recovered M. tuberculosis isolate is resistant to at least isoniazid, rifampicin, a
fluoroquinolone (ofloxacin, levofloxacin, or moxifloxacin) and a second-line injectable anti-
TB drug (kanamycin, amikacin, or capreomycin) at a RNTCP-certified culture and DST
laboratory. A patient is confirmed to have MDR or XDR TB only when the results are from a
RNTCP quality-assured culture and DST Laboratory and by a RNTCP-endorsed testing
method mentioned as below:
34

Common Conditions
Choice of Diagnostic Technology
Currently, the programme is scaling up the laboratory capacity of various culture and DST
laboratories at state level IRLs and other laboratories. The choice of technology to be used for
diagnosis of MDR TB has been determined as per recommendations of the National
Laboratory Committee. Thus, for DST at certified laboratory, wherever available Molecular
DST (e.g. Line Probe Assay (LPA)) is preferred diagnostic method because of the rapid and
highly-accurate rifampicin results, followed in preference by Liquid C-DST and then Solid
C-DST.
MDR Diagnostic Technology Choice
First Molecular DST (e.g. LPA DST)
Second Liquid culture isolation and LPA DST
Third Solid culture isolation and LPA DST
Fourth Liquid culture isolation and Liquid DST
Fifth Solid culture isolation and DST
Similarly for follow up cultures, wherever available, liquid culture will be preferred over
solid culture. However, this will be liquid cultures for at least the crucial months of follow-up
(IP-3, 4, 5, 6 and CP-18, 21, 24) and over and beyond this, it will be determined by the
workload of individual laboratories.
Table11. Grouping anti-TB agents (first line and second line drugs)
Grouping Drugs
Group 1: First-line oral anti-TB Isoniazid (H); Rifampicin (R); Ethambutol (E);
agents Pyrazinamide(Z)
Group 2: Injectable anti-TB Streptomycin (S); Kanamycin (Km); Amikacin (Am);
agents Capreomycin (Cm); Viomycin (Vm).
Ciprofloxacin (Cfx); Ofloxacin (Ofx); Levofloxacin
Group 3: Fluoroquinolones (Lvx);
Moxifloxacin (Mfx); Gatifloxacin (Gfx)
Ethionamide (Eto); Prothionamide (Pto); Cycloserine
Group 4: Oral second-line anti-
(Cs);
TB agents
Terizadone (Trd); para-aminosalicylic acid (PAS)
Clofazimine (Cfz); Linezolid (Lzd); Amoxicillin /
Group 5: Agents with unclear
Clavulanate
efficacy (not recommended by
(Amx/Clv); thioacetazone (Thz); imipenem/cilastatin
WHO for routine use in MDR-TB
( Ipm / Cln);
patients)
high-dose isoniazid (high-dose H); Clarithromycin (Clr)
All drugs should be given in a single daily dosage under directly observed treatment (DOT)
by a DOT Provider. All patients will receive drugs under direct observation on 6 days of the
-
35

Common Conditions
week. On Sunday, the oral drugs will be administered unsupervised whereas injection
kanamycin will be omitted.
If intolerance occurs to the drugs, ethionamide, cycloserine and PAS may be split into two
dosages and the morning dose administered under DOT. The evening dose will be self-
-
administered. The empty blister packs of the self-administered doses will be checked the next
morning during DOT.
Pyridoxine should be administered to all patients on an RNTCP Category IV regimen.
Drug dosages for MDR-TB cases are base on the weight bands as shown in below (Table 12).
-
 Treatment of MDR TB (Category IV regimen)
RNTCP will be using a standardised treatment tegimen (Cat IV) for the treatment of
MDR-TB cases (and those with rifampicin resistance) under the programme.
-
Cat IV regimen comprises of 6 drugs (Table 11) kanamycin, high dose levofloxacin,
ethionamide, pyrazinamide, ethambutol and cycloserine during 6-9 months of the intensive
-
phase (IP) and 4 drugs- high dose levofloxacin, ethionamide, ethambutol and cycloserine
during the 18 months of the continuation phase (CP).
P-aminosalicylic acid (PAS) is included in the regimen as a substitute drug in case of
intolerance i.e. severe ADR leading to discontinuation of drug to any of the drug in the Cat
-
IV regimen.
For management of patients with Km mono resistance, the committee recommended
replacement of Km with capreomycin, If Km is intolerant, substitute amikacin (AK) if
-
possible, or PAS if injectable agent not feasible.
 Drug dosages and administration
Table12. Dosage and weight band recommendations of second line drugs
S.No Drugs 16-25 Kgs 26-45 Kgs 46-70 Kgs
1 Kanamycin 500 mg 500 mg 750 mg
2 Levofloxacin (High Dose) 250 mg 750 mg 1000 mg
3 Ethionamide 375 mg 500 mg 750 mg
4 Ethambutol 400 mg 800 mg 1200 mg
5 Pyrazinamide 500 mg 1250 mg 1500 mg
6 Cycloserine 250 mg 500 mg 750 mg
7 PAS (80% Bioavailability)1 5 gm 10 gm 12 gm
8 Pyridoxine 50 mg 100mg 100mg
1 In case of PAS with 60% bioavailability the dose will be increased to 7 gm (16-25 Kg); 14
gm (26-45 Kg) and 16 gm (> 45 Kg)
If a patient gains 5 kgor more in weight during treatment and crosses the weight-band
range, the DOTS–Plus site committee may consider moving the patient to the higher
-
weight-band drug dosages.
36

Common Conditions
Similarly if a patient loses 5 kgs or more in weight during treatment and crosses the
weight band the DOTS Plus site committee may consider moving the patient to the lower
-
weight band.
The new higher/lower dosages are provided whenever the patient is due for the next
supply of drugs in the normal course of treatment and not as soon as change of weight is
-
noted.
The dosages of 2nd line drugs for MDR TB cases in paediatric age group weighing < 16
kg as per the Table 13.
-
Table 13. Dosage of 2ndline drugs for treatment of pediatric MDR TB cases
Drug Daily Dose– mg/kg body weight
Kanamycin 15-30
Levofloxacin 7.5-10
Ethionamide 15-20
Cycloserine 15-20
PAS 150
Ethambutol 25
Pyrazinamide 30-40
The dosages for higher weight patients include use additional dosages of some 2nd line
drugs for MDR TB cases in patients weighing > 70 kg taking the dosage to kanamycin (1
-
gm), ethionamide (1 gm), cycloserine (1 gm), ethambutol (1.6 gm) and pyrazinamide (2
gm). All these are well within the maximum permissible dosage for each drug as per the
WHO guidelines.
 Treatment of XDR-TB (Category V)
All XDR-TB patients who are considered for category V regimen, will be screened by the
DOTS-Plus committee and if found suitable will be referred to a thoracic surgeon for
consideration of surgery to improve the treatment outcomes. Identification must be done for
the site (tertiary centres) with such surgical facilities.
XDR Regimen (Table 14)
6-12 months Cm, PAS, Mfx, High dose‐H, Cfz, Lzd, Amx/Clv
18 months PAS, Mfx, High dose‐H, Cfz, Lzd, Amx/Clv
The Category V treatment regimen consists of 7 drugs, with 2 reserve/substitute drugs.
The dosage of the drugs would vary as per the weight of the patient (≤ 45Kg or > 45Kg).
-
All drugs are to be given on a daily basis. Injections of capreomycin will be given for 6
days/week (not on Sundays).
37

Common Conditions
All morning doses are to be supervised by the DOT Provider except on Sundays. After
taking DOT for morning doses on Saturday, next day medicines would be given to the
-
patient to be taken at home on Sunday.
Empty blisters of medicines taken unsupervised in evening and on Sundays are to be
collected by DOT Provider.
-
The change from IP to CP will be done only after achievement of culture conversion i.e.
2 consecutive negative cultures taken at least one month apart. In case of delay in culture
-
conversion, the IP can be extended from 6 months up to a maximum of 12 months. In
case of extension, the DOTS – Plus site Committee, which will be responsible for
initiating and monitoring the Category V regimen, can decide on administering
capreomycin injection intermittently (3 times/week) for the months 7 to 12.
Table14. Drugs and Dosages for management of XDR TB
Dosage/day
Drugs
<45 Kgs > 45 Kgs
Inj. Capreomycin (Cm) 750 mg 1000 mg
PAS 10 gm 12 gm
Moxifloxacin (Mfx) 400 mg 400 mg
High dose INH (High dose-H) 600 mg 900 mg
Clofazimine (Cfz) 200 mg 200 mg
Linezolid (Lzd) 600 mg 600 mg
Amoxiclav (Amx/Clv) 875/125 mg BD 875/125 mg BD
Pyridoxine 100 mg 100 mg
Reserve/Substitute drugs
Clarithromycin (Clr) 500 mg BD 500 mg BD
Thiacetazone (Thz)# 150 mg 150 mg
# Depending on availability, not to be given to HIV positive cases
The reserve/substitute drugs would be used in the following conditions:
In case the patient was on PAS in Category IV, PAS will be replaced with one of
the reserve drugs in the Category V regimen
-
If the patient is unable to tolerate one or more of the drugs
If the patient is found to be resistant to capreomycin
-
 HIV co-infection with TB
-
TB patients living with HIV should receive the same duration of TB treatment with
daily regimen as HIV negative TB patients.
-
Antiretroviral therapy (ART) must be offered to all patients with HIV and TB as well
as drug-resistant TB requiring second-line anti-TB drugs, irrespective of CD4 cell-
-
count, as early as possible (within the first 8 weeks) following initiation of anti-TB
treatment. Appropriate arrangements for access to antiretroviral drugs should be made
38

Common Conditions
for patients. However, initiation of treatment for TB should not be delayed. Patients
with TB and HIV infection should also receive co-trimoxazole as prophylaxis for
other infections.
People living with HIV should be screened for TB using four symptom complex
(current cough or, fever or weight loss or night sweats) at HIV care settings and those
-
with any of these symptoms should be evaluated for ruling out active TB. Such
patients in whom active TB is ruled out, Isoniazid Preventive Therapy (IPT) in the
dosage of10 mg/Kg body weight should be offered to them for 6 months.
 Adherence
Supervision and support should be individualized.
Ensuring Adherence in M/XDR TB patients: Patient support systems, including direct
-
observation of treatment, are required to ensure adherence. It should be ensured that
-
the patient consumes all the dosages of the drugs.
Trained treatment supporter for treatment adherence: Such measures may include
identification and training of a treatment supporter (for TB and, if appropriate, for
-
HIV, diabetes mellitus etc.) who is acceptable, accessible and accountable to the
patient and to the health system.
Information Communication Technology to promote treatment literacy and
adherence: Optimal use of Information Communication Technology (ICT) should be
-
done to promote treatment literacy and adherence
Other important points to remember
 Public Health Responsibility- Any practitioner treating a TB patient is assuming an
important public health responsibility to prevent ongoing transmission of the infection
and the development of drug resistance. To fulfill this responsibility the practitioner must
not only prescribe an appropriate regimen, but also utilize local public health services /
community health services, and other agencies including NGOs when necessary, to assess
the adherence of the patient and to address poor adherence when it occurs.
 Maintain Records for all TB patients: A written record of all medications given,
microbiological response and adverse reactions should be maintained for all patients.
Every patient’s clinical outcome should be recorded in the case register and available for
public health monitoring.
 Notification of TB Cases: All health establishments must report all TB cases and their
treatment outcomes to public health authorities (District Nodal Officer for Notification).
Proper feedback need to be ensured to all health care providers who refer cases to public
health system on the outcome of the patients which they had referred.
 Contact Investigation:
All providers of care for patients with TB should ensure all household contacts (including
children) and other persons who are in close contact with TB patients are screened for TB
as per defined diagnostic standards.
39

Common Conditions
In case of pediatric TB patients, reverse contact tracing for search of any active TB case in
the household of the child must be undertaken.
The highest priority contacts of known TB cases for intensive case finding (such as are:
- Persons with symptoms suggestive of TB
- Children aged <6 years
- Knownor suspected immune-compromised patient, particularly HIV infection.
- Diabetes Mellitus
- Other higher risks including pregnancy, mental disorders, smokers and alcoholics etc.
- Patients with DR-TB - In case of contact with a DR-TB index case, close clinical
monitoring should be provided, as there is no evidence that treatment of latent
infection with available drugs is presently effective
Follow up
Follow up smear and culture schedule during treatment
For follow up examination two sputum specimens will be collected and examined by
smear and culture at least 30 days apart from the 3rd to 7th month of treatment (i.e. at
-
the end of the months 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7) and at 3-monthly intervals from the 9th month
onwards till the completion of treatment (i.e. at the end of the months 9, 12, 15, 18, 21
and 24).
The two specimens for smear and culture at the RNTCP accredited lab (one early
morning and one supervised spot) will be collected and transported from the
-
respective DTC to the RNTCP accredited laboratory.
If any of the cultures in the last three quarters becomes positive, it will be followed up
by monthly cultures in the following 3 months.
-
Table 15. Common adverse effects of 2ndline drugs and management strategies
Adverse effects Suspected agent(s) Suggested management strategies
Gastrointestinal
 Assess for dehydration; initiate rehydration
PAS, isoniazid, moxifloxacin if indicated
Nausea and linezolid, clofazamine  Initiate anti-emetic therapy
vomiting amoxyclav, alarithromycin  Discontinue suspected agent if this can be
thioacetazone done without compromising regimen –
rarely necessary
 H2-blockers, proton-pump inhibitors, or
antacids
PAS, moxifloxacin  Stop suspected agent(s) for short periods of
Gastritis isoniazid, linezolid time (e.g., one to seven days)
amoxiclav, clarithromycin  Lower dose of suspected agent, if this can
thioacetazone be done without compromising regimen
 Discontinue suspected agent if this can be
done without compromising regimen
Hepatitis Isoniazid, PAS, moxifloxacin  Stop all therapy pending resolution of
linezolid hepatitis
40

Common Conditions
 Eliminate other potential causes of hepatitis
 Consider suspending most likely agent
permanently. Reintroduce remaining drugs,
one at a time with the most hepatotoxic
agents last, while monitoring liver function
Cutaneous and hypersensitivity reactions
 Withhold all drugs and treat
symptomatically with antihistamines/
steroids till the reaction subsides.
PAS, linezolid,  Identify offending drug in severe forms
Hypersensitivity
clarithromycin  Attempt desensitization of the offending
drug
 Discontinue suspected agent and substitute
with the reserve drug
 Treat symptomatically with antihistamines
till the reaction subsides.
Linezolid,
Cutaneous  Patient should be counseled on the skin
clofazamine
discoloration with long term use of
clofazamine
Psychiatric
 Improve socioeconomic conditions
Socio-economic  Group or individual counseling
circumstances,  Initiate antidepressant therapy
Depression
chronic disease,  Lower dose of suspected agent if this can be
moxifloxcin, done without compromising the regimen
isoniazid  Discontinue suspected agent if this can be
done without compromising regimen
Neurological
 Increase pyridoxine to maximum daily dose
(200 mg per day)
 Initiate therapywith tricyclic
Isoniazid, linezolid antidepressants such as amitriptyline. Non-
Peripheral steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or
neuropathy acetaminophen may help alleviate
symptoms
 Lower dose of suspected agent, if this can
be done without compromising regimen
 Discontinue suspected agent if this can be
done without compromising regimen
 Suspend suspected agent pending resolution
of convulsions
 Initiate anticonvulsant therapy (e.g.
Isoniazid, moxifloxacin, phenytoin, valproic acid)
Convulsions
linezolid  Increase pyridoxine to maximum daily dose
(200 mg per day).
 Restart suspected agent or reinitiate
suspected agent at lower dose, if essential to
the regimen
41

Common Conditions
 Discontinue suspected agent if this can be
done without compromising regimen
 Document hearing loss and compare with
baseline audiometry if available
 Change parenteral treatment to
capreomycin if patient has documented
Capreomycin susceptibility to capreomycin
Hearing loss
clarithromycin  Increase frequency and/or lower dose of
suspected agent if this can be done without
compromising the regimen(consider
administration three times per week)
 Discontinue suspected agent if this can be
done without compromising the regimen
Ocular Linezolid In consultation with the ophthalmologist
Musculoskeletal
 Initiate therapy with non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs.
Arthralgia Moxifloxacin  Lower dose of suspected agent, if this can
be done without compromising regimen.
 Discontinue suspected agent if this can be
done without compromising regimen
Musculoskeletal Moxifloxacin In consultation with the orthopedician
Haematological
Capreomycin, PAS, Monitor for anemia, bleeding tendency and cell
Haematalogic
linezolid, clarithromycin counts
Renal
 Discontinue suspected agent
 Consider using capreomycin if an
Capreomycin aminoglycoside had been the prior
linezolid injectable in regimen
Renal toxicity
clarithromycin  Consider dosing 2 to 3 times a week if drug
is essential to the regimen and patient can
tolerate (close monitoring of creatinine)
 Adjust all TB medications according to the
creatinine clearance
Metabolic and Electrolytes
Metabolic and Capreomycin, linezolid Periodic monitoring of serum electrolytes and
electrolyte moxifloxacin blood sugar
Endocrine
Thyroid
PAS Supplement with thyroxine
dysfunction
Cardiovascular
Moxifloxacin, clarithromycin  Monitor for QT prolongation, monitor
QT prolongation
platelet count, bleeding tendencies
42

Common Conditions
 Chemoprophylaxis of contacts of MDR-TB cases
Among contacts of patients with MDR-TB, the use of isoniazid may reasonably be
questioned. Although alternative prophylaxis treatments have been suggested, there is no
consensus regarding the choice of the drug(s) and the duration of treatment. Prompt
treatment of MDR-TB is the most effective way of preventing the spread of infection to
others. The following measures should be taken to prevent spread of MDR-TB infection:
Early diagnosis and appropriate treatment of MDR-TB cases;
Screening of contacts as per RNTCP guidelines
-
Further research into effective and non-toxic chemoprophylaxis in areas of high
-
MDR-TB prevalence.
-
Patient education
Providing counseling and health education to the MDR-TB patient and their family
members about the disease and about the necessity of taking regular and adequate
-
treatment is of utmost importance.
Health education and counseling is provided to all patients and family members at
different levels of health care, right from one at the periphery to those at the DOTS-Plus
-
site facility. It is started at the initial point of contact and carried on a continuous basis at
all visits by the patient to a health facility. The counseling and motivation is required to
be done not only of the patient but also of the family members.
EPILEPSY
A seizure is a paroxysmal event due to abnormal excessive or synchronous neuronal activity
in the brain. Epilepsy describes a condition in which a person has recurrent seizures due to a
chronic, underlying process.
Classification of Seizures
 Generalized seizures
Tonic clonic, clonic, tonic, absence (typical/ atypical), atonic and myoclonic
May be focal, generalized, or unclear epileptic spasms
 Focal seizures (can be further described as having motor, sensory, autonomic, cognitive,
or other features) with and without dyscognitive features
Investigations
It should be made sure that the patient had a seizure and other differentials should be ruled
out. In the patient with prior seizures or a known history of epilepsy, the evaluation is
directed toward (1) underlying cause and precipitating factors (2) adequacy of current
therapy.
Pharmacological treatment
 Treatment of underlying conditions
- Metabolic imbalances such as abnormal serum electrolytes and glucose, medications
(theophylline), illicit drug use (e.g., cocaine), structural CNS lesion such as a brain
tumor, vascular malformation, or brain abscess.
43

Common Conditions
 Avoidance of precipitating factors like sleep deprivation, alcohol, bright light, etc.
 Antiepileptic drug therapy mainstay of treatment for most patients with epilepsy.
Table 16.Selection of antiepileptic drugs according to classification of epilepsy
Atypical absence,
Generalized tonic Typical absence
Focal seizures myoclonic and atonic
clonic seizures seizures
seizures
First line drugs
Valproic acid Lamotrigine Valproic acid Valproic acid
Lamotrigine Capbamazepine Ethosuximide Lamotrigine
Topiramate Oxcarbazepine Topiramate
Phenytoin
Levetiracetam
Alternatives
Zonisamide Topiramate Lamotrigine Clonazepam
Phenytoin Zonisamide Clonazepam Felbamate
Capbamazepine Valproic acid
Oxcarbazepine Tiagabine
Phenobarbitone Gabapentin
Primidone Lacosamide
Felbamate Phenobarbitone
Primidone
Felbamate
Pregnancy
 Most women with epilepsy who become pregnant will have an uncomplicated gestation
and deliver a normal baby. Since the potential harm of uncontrolled convulsive seizures
on the mother and fetus is considered greater than the teratogenic effects of antiepileptic
drugs, it is currently recommended that pregnant women be maintained on effective drug
therapy. Patients should take folic acid (1–4 mg/d), to prevent development of neural tube
defects.
Contraception
 Drugs such as carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, and topiramate can significantly
decrease the efficacy of oral contraceptives via enzyme induction and other mechanisms.
Patients should be advised to consider alternative forms of contraception.
44

Common Conditions
STATUS EPILEPTICUS
Status epilepticus refers to continuous seizures or repetitive, discrete seizures with impaired
consciousness in the interictal period. The duration of seizure activity sufficient to meet the
definition of status epilepticus has traditionally been specified as 15–30 minutes. The
treatment plan for an adult with status epilepticus is as in Figure 10.
Figure 10. Treatment algorithm for generalized tonic clonic status epilepticus in adults
45

Common Conditions
URINARY TRACT INFECTION
Urinary tract infections include infection of any part of urinary tract from kidneys to urethra.
It can be caused by unhygenic lifestyle, sexually transmitted, per urethral catheterization,
renal calculus disease and vesicoureteric reflux.
Salient features
 Burning micturition, urinary frequency, flank pain, fever
 Predisposing factors are diabetes mellitus, large prostate, and circumcision.
 Common organisms are E.coli, Pseudomonas, Klebsiella.
Investigations
 TC with DC,X-ray KUB,USG-KUB,Urine (routine and microbiological examination)
 Urine culture and sensitivityto be done if bacterial colony count is more than 1000.
Non pharmacological treatment
Plenty of fluids orally, maintain hygiene
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab.ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice a day for five days.
 In resistance cases 3rd generation cephalosporins (cefixime) followed by antibiotics as per
culture and sensitivity report.
 If fever then Tab. paracetamol 500 mgthrice a day for three days.
46