Chapter 3
EMERGENCYCONDITIONS
CARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) consists of a series of maneuvers by which oxygenated
blood supply to brain and vital organs is maintained during cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA) i.e.
cessation of respiration and circulation. In children, CPA is not sudden but end result of long
period of hypoxaemia secondary to inadequate ventilation, oxygenation or circulation. Therefore,
prompt management of these is essential to prevent CPA, the outcome of which is poor.
Diagnosis of cardiopulmonary and cardiac arrest
1. Absence of pulse in major arteries (carotid or femoral in older children and
femoral or brachial in infants as carotid is difficult to palpate due to short neck).
2. Absence of heart sounds on auscultation.
3. Asystole /ventricular fibrillation on ECG.
Respiratory arrest
Absence of respiration on examination (absent chest movements), listening (absent air flow on
bringing ears in front of mouth) and feeling (absent air flow on keeping hands in front of mouth
or nose).
Levels of CPR
Basic life support (BLS): The elements of CPR are provided without additional equipment.
Skill and speed are most essential.
Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS): Use of equipment and drugs for assisting ventilation
orcirculation.
Primary survey to assess the patient's condition:
 Tap the patient on the shoulder and ask, "Are you all right?"
 If the patient does not respond, call for help.
 Give 2 minutes (5 cycles) of CPR before leaving patient to call for help.
 Check for pulse or any other signs of life; begin CPR, 30 compressions to 2 respirations
(push hard and fast--100/minute and release chest completely).
 Open airway and check for breathing. Give 2 breaths that make the chest rise.
 Start an IV line.
 Begin oxygen.
 Attach a monitor
 Intravenous / Intra osseous (IO) access is a priority over advanced airway management. If an
advanced airway is placed, change to continuous chest compressions without pauses for
breaths. Give 8 to 10 breaths per minute and check rhythm every 2 minutes.
47

Emergency Conditions
CHART
SIMPLIFIED ADULT BLS
Source 2010 American Heart Association Guidelines
48

Emergency Conditions
ADULT BLS HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS
Source 2010 American Heart Association Guidelines
49

Emergency Conditions
AHA ACLS ADULT CARDIAC ARREST ALGORITHM
Source 2010 American Heart Association Guidelines
50

Emergency Conditions
AHA ACLS ADULT CARDIAC ARREST ALGORITHM
Source 2010 American Heart Association Guidelines
51

Emergency Conditions
ANAPHYLAXIS
It is a generalized hypersensitivity reaction characterized by hypotension, peripheral
circulatory collapse and respiratory difficulty in the form of stridor and dyspnoea.
Anaphylaxis can be due to food, inhaled/ingested allergens or drugs. Symptoms occur
instantaneously or within a few minutes following exposure to the offending agent.
Anaphylaxis to oral drugs may take 1-2 hours, but in many patients it can be instantaneous. A
severe anaphylactoid reaction is a life-threatening emergency. Effective treatment depends on
prompt diagnosis and rapid supplementation of appropriate therapy.
Clinical criteria for diagnosis
Anaphylaxis is highly likely when any one of the following three criteria is fulfilled:
1. Acute onset of an illness (minutes to several hours) with involvement of the skin, mucosal
tissue, or both (e.g., generalized urticaria, itching or flushing, swollen lips/tongue/uvula)
with one of the following,
 Respiratory compromise (e.g., dyspnoea, wheeze-bronchospasm, stridor, reduced
peak expiratoryflow(PEF), hypoxemia)
 Reduced blood pressure or associated symptoms of end-organ dysfunction (e.g.
hypotonia, collapse, syncope, incontinence)
 Involvement of the skin-mucosal tissue
 Persistent gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., cramping abdominal pain, vomiting) or
2. Reduced blood pressure after exposure to known allergen,
 Infants and children- low systolic blood pressure (age-specific) or greater than 30%
decrease in systolic blood pressure
 Adults- systolic blood pressure of less than 90 mm Hg or greater than 30% decrease
from baseline
52

Emergency Conditions
Salient features
Skin, subcutaneous tissue, and mucosa
 Flushing, itching, urticaria (hives), angioedema, morbilliform rash, piloerection
 Periorbital itching, erythema and edema, conjunctival erythema, tearing
 Itching of lips, tongue, palate, and external auditory canals; and swelling of lips, tongue,
and uvula
 Itching of genitalia, palms, and soles
Respiratory
 Nasal itching, congestion, rhinorrhea, sneezing
 Throat itching and tightness, dysphonia, hoarseness, stridor, dry staccato cough
 Lower airways: increased respiratory rate, shortness of breath, chest tightness, deep cough,
wheezing/bronchospasm, decreased peak expiratory flow
 Cyanosis, respiratory arrest
Gastrointestinal
 Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting (stringy mucus), diarrhea, dysphagia
Cardiovascular system
 Chest pain
 Tachycardia, bradycardia (less common), other arrhythmias, palpitations
 Hypotension, feeling faint, urinary or fecal incontinence, shock
 Cardiac arrest
Central nervous system
 Aura of impending doom, uneasiness (in infants and children, sudden behavioral change,
e.g. irritability, cessation of play, clinging to parent); throbbing
 Headache (pre-epinephrine), altered mental status, dizziness, confusion, tunnel vision
Non pharmacological treatment
 Remove exposure to trigger if possible (discontinue intravenous diagnostic or therapeutic
agent that seems to triggering symptoms). Place the patient supine and elevate the
extremities.
 Observe vital signs frequently and if possible, monitor electrocardiogram and pulse
oximetry.
 For severe anaphylaxis with shock, initial management should be directed at the ABC of
resuscitation, namely maintenance of adequate airway - suction, breathing, and
circulation. If working alone, call for assistance.
Pharmacological treatment
 Inj. adrenaline 1:1000 (1mg/ml), 0.01 ml/kg (maximum 0.3 ml in children and 0.5 ml in
adults) IM (mid anterolateral aspect of thigh). If necessary, dose can be repeated every 15
minutes.
53

Emergency Conditions
 If the anaphylaxis is due to an allergen extract or to a hymenoptera sting into an
extremity, half the dose of adrenaline can be infiltrated locally, subcutaneously after
dilution with 2 ml saline.
 High flow oxygen (4-6 lit/min by face mask or oropharyngeal airway).
 Establish two wide bore intravenous lines. Commence rapid fluid resuscitation with Inj.
NS (0.9% normal saline) at rate of 5-10 ml/kg in 5 to 10 minutes. One to two litres of
fluid bolus can be given.
 Intubate and commence intermittent positive pressure ventilation if severe laryngeal
obstruction, bronchospasm, circulatory shock or coma.
 If no response to the initial intramuscular dose of adrenaline, administer adrenaline 5
mcg/kg slowly in to the intravenous line. Repeat at 5 minutes intervals depending on
response. If the patient remains in shock, start an adrenaline infusion (preferably via a
central venous line), commencing at 0.1 mcg/kg/min in children and 0.2 mcg/kg/min in
adults with titration required to restore blood pressure. Large doses of adrenaline may
be needed.
 Commence cardiopulmonary resuscitation, if necessary.
 If the only manifestation of anaphylaxis is urticaria or angioedema, initial IM dose of
adrenaline should be given in addition to antagonists. If no other manifestation, patient
can be kept under observation for at least 12 hours and then discharged.
Additional measures
 IV infusion of chlorpheniramine 10 mg (adult), 2.5-5 mg (child) or diphenhydramine 25-
50 mg (adult) (1 mg/kg, maximum 50 mg [child]).
 Inj. salbutamol solution, 2.5 to 5 mg/3 ml given by nebulizer and face mask.
 IV hydrocortisone infusion 200 mg (adult), maximum 100 mg (child); or
methylprednisolone 50-100 mg (adult); 1 mg/kg, maximum 50 mg (child).
Supportive treatment
All patients with severe anaphylactic reaction must be hospitalized. Patients who remain
clinically unstable after initial resuscitation should be admitted to intensive care unit (ICU).
Patients respondingto the initial treatment should be observed for possible late reaction.
Patient education
To check and look for the cause (food, drugs etc.) and to avoid it in future
ACUTE AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION
The cause of acute airway obstruction can be underlying malignancy, abscess, laryngeal cyst
or laryngocele. It is necessary to assess the severity of the condition before initiating the
treatment.
Emergency treatment
 Head extension with lower jaw thrust forward
 Suctioning for clearing secretions
54

Emergency Conditions
 Ventilatory mask with 100% oxygen
 Endotracheal intubation or tracheostomy
In stable patient
 Plain X-ray neck
 Fibre optic endoscopy / micro-laryngoscopy / bronchoscopy to find out the cause
Treatment guidelines
Assess Severity of airway
Portableradiographic ultrasonography
ECGmonitoringandsupplemental oxygen
Pulse oximetry, blood pressure
Cricothyrotomy Tracheostomy
Emergency intubation
STRIDOR
Stridor is noisy, harsh and difficult breathing due to obstruction of the airway. It is classified
inspiratory, expiratory and biphasic type. Inspiratory stridor occurs due to an obstruction at or
above the level of vocal cords. Expiratory stridor is due to obstruction at bronchiolar level
such as bronchial asthma while biphasic stridor occurs in tracheal and subglottic stenosis. In
children the stridor of laryngo-tracheo-bronchitis has a crowing quality and is called ‘Croup’.
Salient features
• Restlessness, anxiety and distress, labored / noisy breathing, predominantly on
inspiration
• Difficulty in swallowing and speaking
• In children: cyanosis, chest retraction, tachypnea, altered level of consciousness,
feeding difficulties
Pharmacological treatment
 Humidified oxygen
 Inj. hydrocortisone 100 mg IVstat and can be repeated as required.
 Inj. ampicillin 500mg QID IV/for5-7 days
 Inj. adrenaline 0.2-0.5mg subcutaneously if necessary.
55

Emergency Conditions
SHOCK
Shock is defined as a circulatory insufficiency that creates an imbalance between tissue
oxygen supply and demand.
Classification and causes of shock
1. Haemorrhagic shock
 Traumatic–blunt or penetrating injury, fractures of long bones and pelvis
 Non-traumatic - GI bleeds (e.g. peptic ulcer, gastric mucosal erosions, oesophageal
varices, typhoid bleeds, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), aortic
dissection, rupture of aneurysm of a large vessel
2. Hypovolaemic shock
 Fluid loss from vomiting and/or diarrhoea e.g. in cholera, other GI infections
 Fluid loss in diabetes mellitus, adrenal insufficiency, excessive sweating, exfoliative
dermatitis, diabetes insipidus, reaccumulation of ascites after tapping
 Sequestration of fluid e.g. in intestinal obstruction, pancreatitis, burns, crush injuries
3. Cardiogenic shock
 Acute myocardial infarction
 Cardiomyopathy, cardiac arrhythmias
 Mechanical causes e.g. valvular disease, outflow tract obstruction, ruptured
ventricular septum
4. Distributive or vasogenic (relative hypovolaemia)
 Septic shock; toxic shock syndrome
 Anaphylactic
 Neurogenic
Shock is a progressive disorder, if untreated can lead to severe haemodynamic and metabolic
deterioration causing multi-organ failure. Stages of shock can be arbitrarily classified as:
 Early compensated shock -Vital organ function is maintained by intrinsic compensatory
mechanisms. Blood pressure is usually normal, there is increasing tachycardia and
hypotension. The skin is cold and clammy, increased capillary refill time (>3 sec). If there
is delay in treatment it may-lead to decompensated shock.
 Decompensated shock - There is fall in blood pressure and cardiac output. Features of
peripheral poor perfusion are compounded with manifestations of vital organ impairment.
Patient may have alteration of mentation (impaired cerebral perfusion), oliguria (renal
hypoperfusion) and myocardial ischaemia (coronary flow impairment). Patient has
acrocyanosis, cold and damp extremities and a pale look. If untreated, progress to
irreversible state of shock.
 Irreversible shock is a term applied to the clinical situation in which even
haemodynamic correction does not halt the progressive organ failure.
56

Emergency Conditions
Salient features
 Tachycardia, blood pressure may be normal or elevated due to compensatory
mechanisms, later falls as cardiovascular compensation fails. Neck veins may be
distended or flattened, depending on the etiology of shock. Decreased coronary
perfusion pressures can lead to ischemia, decreased ventricular compliance, and
increased left ventricular diastolic pressure and pulmonary edema.
 Tachypnea, increased minute ventilation, and increased dead space are common.
Bronchospasm, hypocapnia with progression to respiratory failure, and adult
respiratory distress syndrome can be seen.
 Skin pale, dusky, clammy skin with cyanosis, sweating, altered temperature, and
decreased capillary refill, oliguria.
Treatment
 Start oxygen 4-6 L/min
 Airway control, endotracheal intubation
 Adequate venous access. Large-bore peripheral intravenous catheters for adequate fluid
resuscitation. Central venous access may be necessary for monitoring and employing
pulmonary artery catheters, venous pacemakers, and long-term vasopressor therapy.
 Volume replacement. Isotonic, intravenous crystalloid fluids (0.9% NaCl, Ringer’s
lactate) are preferred for the initial resuscitation phase. Initial bolus volume is 20 to 40
ml/kg over 10 to 20 min (rapid infusion). Colloids (dextran, hetastarch, etc.) can be used
till blood is available.
 Blood is the ideal resuscitative fluid for hemorrhagic shock or in the presence of
significant anemia. Fully cross-matched blood is preferred, but if more rapid intervention
is required, type specific or type O negative blood may be employed. The decision to use
platelets or fresh frozen plasma (FFP) should be based on evidence of impaired
hemostasis and on frequent monitoring of coagulation parameters. Platelets are generally
given if there is ongoing hemorrhage and the platelet count is 50,000 or less; FFP is
indicated if the prothrombin time is prolonged more than 1.5 times.
 Vasopressors should be used if there is persistent hypotension after adequate volume
resuscitation. Inj. dobutamine 2.0 to 20.0 µg/kg/min for systolic BP over 100 mmHg,
dopamine 2.5 to 20.0 µg/kg/min for systolic BP 70 to 100 mmHg, and Inj. norepinephrine
0.5 to 30.0 µg/min for systolic BP under 70 mmHg.
 Acidosis should be treated with adequate ventilation and fluid resuscitation. Use of
sodium bicarbonate (1 meq/kg) is controversial. If it is used, it is given only in the setting
of severe acidosis refractory to ventilation and fluid resuscitation.
 Early surgical or medical consultation for admission or transfer as indicated.
57

Emergency Conditions
Monitoring
Special care in ICU should be taken by careful and continuous monitoring of BP, pulse rate
and respiratory rate, urine output and mental status frequently. Sedated patients should be
allowed to awaken ("drug holiday") daily to assess their neurologic status and to shorten
duration of ventilator support.
Management guidelines for common causes of shock
Hemorrhagic Shock
 Ensure adequate ventilation/oxygenation
 Provide immediate control of hemorrhage (e.g., traction for long bone fractures, direct
pressure)
 Initiate judicious infusion of isotonic crystalloid solution (10–20 ml/kg) or colloid
solution
 With evidence of poor organ perfusion and 30-minute anticipated delay to hemorrhage
control, begin packed red bloodcell (PRBC) infusion (5–10 ml/kg)
 Treat coincident dysrhythmias (e.g., atrial fibrillation with synchronized cardioversion)
Cardiogenic Shock
 Ameliorate increased work of breathing; provide oxygen and positive end-expiratory
pressure (PEEP) for pulmonaryedema
 Begin vasopressor or inotropic support; Inj. norepinephine (0.5 µg/min) and Inj.
dobutamine (5 µg/kg/min)
 Seek to reverse the insult (e.g., initiate thrombolysis, arrange percutaneous transluminal
angioplasty)
 Consider intra-aortic balloon pump counterpulsation for refractory shock
Septic Shock
 Ensure adequate oxygenation
 Administer 20 ml/kg of crystalloid (0.9% normal saline or RL) or 5 ml/kg of colloid
(hemaccel or hetastarch), and titrate infusion to adequate central venous pressure and
urine output
 Begin antimicrobial therapy; attempt surgical drainage or débridement
 Begin packed RBC infusion for hemoglobin < 8 g/dL
 If volume restoration fails to improve organ perfusion, begin vasopressor support; initial
choice includes dopamine infusion at 5–15 µg/kg/min
FLUIDANDELECTROLYTE IMBALANCE AND REPLACEMENT (IN ADULTS)
58

Emergency Conditions
Disturbances in fluid and electrolyte balance occur in a wide spectrum of diseases such as
following burns, trauma and major surgery. The conventional and easy method of evaluating
disturbances in fluid and electrolyte balance is the frequent measurement of the concentration
of serum electrolytes. It is crucial to remember that intracellular and extracellular electrolytes
are normally constant, and that major shifts in and out of 'compartments' can occur in disease
with minimal changes in serum electrolyte. Compositional changes also involve disturbances
in acid-base balance.
I. Volume deficit
 Obvious causes
Vomiting, diarrhoea, intestinal fistulae, nasogastric suction, fluid loss following burns,
sequestration of fluid in soft tissue injuries and infections, diuretics, renal disease/adrenal
insufficiency
 Less obvious causes
Inadequate fluid intake, fluid loss through excessive sweating as in high fever, hot humid
temperature, haemodialysis, haemofiltration from surgical incisions and tetanus
Treatment
The first principle is to restore circulating volume through infusion of intravenous fluids.
Once this is satisfactorily achieved, disturbances in electrolytes and acid-base balance if
present need to be rectified. Various fluids used for volume replacement are given below:
Replacement fluids
 Replacement fluids are used to replace abnormal loss of blood, plasma or other
extracellular fluids as first line treatment for hypovolemia in:
- Patients with established hypovolemia e.g. haemorrhagic shock.
- Maintenance of normovolaemia in patients with ongoing fluid losses e.g. surgical
blood loss.
 Intravenous replacement fluids are the first line of treatment for hypovolemia.
 Crystalloid maintenance fluids, which contain dextrose, are not suitable for use as
replacement fluids. However, crystalloid solutions with a similar concentration of
sodium to plasma (normal saline or balanced salt) solutions (Ringer's lactate or
Hartmann's solutions) are effective as replacement fluids. These should be available in
all hospitals where intravenous replacement fluids are used. Crystalloids should be
infused in a volume at least three times the volume lost in order to correct hypovolemia.
 All colloid solutions (albumins, dextran, gelatins and hydroxyethyl starch solutions) are
replacement fluids. However, they have not been shown to be superior to crystalloids in
resuscitation. Colloid solutions should be infused in a volume equal to the blood
volume deficit.
 Plasma should never be used as a replacement fluid.
 Plain water should never be infused intravenously as it can cause haemolysis.
59

Emergency Conditions
 In addition to the intravenous route, the intraosseous, oral, rectal or subcutaneous routes
can be used for the administration of fluids, blood and certain drugs. However, with the
exception of intraosseous route, other routes are generally unsuitable in severely
hypovolemic patients.
 Rectal fluids are administered through a plastic or rubber enema tube which is inserted
into the rectum and connected to a bag or bottle of fluid. A safe and effective solution
for a rectal rehydration is 1 liter of clean drinking water with teaspoon of table salt.
 Subcutaneous fluids can be used when other route of administration of fluids are
unavailable. A cannula or needle is inserted into the subcutaneous tissue (the abdominal
wall is a preferred site) and sterile fluids are administered in a conventional manner. Do
not give dextrose-containing solutions subcutaneously as they can cause sloughing of
tissues.
 Oral and nasogastric fluids: Oral rehydration can often be used in mildly hypovolemic
patients if the oral route is not contraindicated. Do not use if:
- The patient is unconscious.
- The patient has gastrointestinal lesions or reduced gut motility e.g. obstruction.
- General anaesthesia and surgery is planned imminently.
WHO/UNICEF formula for oral rehydration fluid:
Dissolve in one litre of drinkable water
Sodium chloride 2.6 g/L
Trisodium citrate, dihydrate 2.9 g/L
Potassium chloride 1.5 g/L
Glucose anhydrous 13.5 g/L
Resulting concentrations
Na 75 mmol/L, CI 65 mmol/L, K 20 mmol/L, Glucose anhydrous 75 mmol/ L, Citrate 10
mmol/L, total osmolarity 245 mmol/L.
Maintenance fluids
Maintenance fluids are used to replace the normal physiological loss that occurs through skin,
lung, faeces and urine. Since a considerable proportion of the loss is water, maintenance
fluids are mainly composed of water in the form of a dextrose solution. Some electrolytes
may also be included in these solutions.
Before giving any intravenous infusion:
 Check that the seal of the infusion fluid bottle or bag is not broken.
 Check the expiry date.
 Check that the solution is clear and free from visible particles.
II. Volume excess
Volume excess is often iatrogenic when the fluid intake has consistently exceeded the
output. Excessive intravenous infusions of saline and blood transfusions are important
60

Emergency Conditions
causes of hypervolemia. Renal insufficiency, congestive heart failure, liver disease and
other causes of sodium retention, or excessive sodium administration can all produce
increase in extracellular fluid content and hypervolemia.
Salient features
 Oedema, ascites, pleural effusion, neck veins full, pulmonary congestion,
hyperdynamic circulation with tachycardia, a warm skin, and a bounding pulse.
 Increase in the systolic pressure and pulse pressure.
 Central venous Pressure (CVP) > 12 mmHg, Pulmonary Capillary Wedge Pressure
(PCWP) >20 mmHg in the presence of pulmonary oedema.
Treatment
In moderate volume excess, salt restriction, restriction of fluid intake and the use of
frusemide as a diuretic will solve the problem. Fulminant pulmonary oedema secondary to
over hydration from over transfusion of blood or fluids is more appropriately dealt with by
phlebotomy in stages so that pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is reduced below 15 mm
Hg. Rarely ultrafiltration (dialysis) may be required.
References
1. Anaesthesia at the District Hospital. In: World Health Organization in collaboration with the World
Federation of Societies of Anesthesiologists, Geneva, 2nd Edition, 2000, WHO.
2. Drugs Used in Anaesthesia. In: WHO Model Prescribing Information, 1989, World Health Organization.
3. Anaesthesia at the District Hospital. In: World Health Organization in collaboration with the World
Federation of Societies of Anesthesiologists, Geneva, 1988, World Health Organization.
SEPTICEMIA
Septicemia is a clinical syndrome caused by invasion of bloodstream by microorganisms.
Gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria account for most common sepsis cases.
Definitions
 Bacteremia (fungemia): presence of viable bacteria (fungi) in the blood, as evidenced by
positive blood cultures.
 Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS): at least two of the following
conditions: (1) oral temperature of >38° C or <35° C, (2) respiratory rate of >20
breaths/min or partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO ) of <32 mm Hg, (3)
2
heart rate of >90 beats/min, (4) leukocyte count of >12,000/dl or <4000/dl or >10%
bands.
 Severe sepsis: sepsis with one or more signs of organ dysfunction, hypoperfusion, or
hypotension, such as metabolic acidosis, alteration in mental status, oliguria, or adult
respiratory distress syndrome.
61

Emergency Conditions
 Septic shock: sepsis with hypotension that is unresponsive to fluid resuscitation plus
organ dysfunction or perfusion abnormalities as listed for severe sepsis.
 Multiple Organ Dysfunction Syndrome (MODS): dysfunction of more than one organ,
requiring intervention homeostasis.
62

Emergency Conditions
Salient features
 Fever or hypothermia may be seen in sepsis. Hypothermia is more often seen in patients
at the extremes of age and in immunocompromised patients.
 Other signs include tachycardia, wide pulse pressure, tachypnea, and hypotension.
 Mental status changes ranging from mild disorientation to coma are commonly seen.
 Ophthalmic manifestations include retinal hemorrhages, cotton-wool spots, and
conjunctival petechiae.
 Cardiovascular manifestations initially include vasodilation, resulting in warm
extremities.
 Cardiac output is maintained early in sepsis through a compensatory tachycardia. As
sepsis progresses, hypotension may occur. Patients in septic shock may demonstrate a
diminished response to volume replacement.
 Renal manifestations include azotemia, oliguria, and active urinary sediment due to
acute tubular necrosis.
 Hepatic dysfunction present as cholestatic jaundice, increases in transaminases, alkaline
phosphatase, and S.bilirubin. Painless mucosal erosions may occur in the stomach and
duodenum and cause upper GI bleeds.
 Skin findings include cellulitis, erysipelas, and fasciitis. Hypotension and disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIC) can also produce skin changes, including acrocyanosis
and necrosis of peripheral tissues.
 Hematologic changes include neutropenia, neutrophilia, thrombocytopenia, and DIC.
Thrombocytopenia occurs in over 30 percent of patients with sepsis. DIC is more often
associated with gram-negative sepsis. Decompensated DIC presents with clinical
bleeding and thrombosis. Laboratory studies can show thrombocytopenia, prolonged
prothrombin time (PT) and partial prothromboplastin time (PTT), decreased fibrinogen
level and antithrombin levels, and increased fibrin monomer, fibrin split values, and D-
dimer values.
 Hyperglycemia may be the result of increased catecholamines, cortisol, and glucagon.
Increased insulin resistance, decreased insulin production, and impaired utilization of
insulin may further contribute to hyperglycemia.
 Arterial blood gas (ABG) studies in early sepsis may reveal hypoxemia and respiratory
alkalosis. As perfusion worsens and glycolysis increases, a metabolic acidosis results.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Aggressive airway management with high-flow oxygen and endotracheal intubation
 Rapid infusion of crystalloid IV fluid (Ringer’s lactate or normal saline) at 500 ml (20
ml/kg in children) every 5 to 10 min; 4 to 6 L (60 ml/kg in children)
63

Emergency Conditions
 Remove source of infection-remove indwelling IV catheters and send the tips for
quantitative culture. Replace urinary drainage catheters if obstructed. Consult the
appropriate specialist for drainage of intra-abdominal, sinus, or soft tissue abscesses.
 Monitor blood pressure, pulse, capillary refill, central venous pressure, pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure, and urine output (>30 ml/h in adults, 1 ml/kg/h in children) to
evaluate therapy. If blood loss is suspected, blood replacement may be necessary
Pharmacological treatment
 Inj. dopamine 5 to 20 µg/kg/min, titrated to response, if hypotension is refractory to IV
fluid.
 If blood pressure remains <70 mmHg despite preceding measures, Inj. norepinephrine 8-
12 µg/min loading dose and a 2-4 µg/min infusion to maintain mean arterial blood
pressure of at least 60 mmHg should be started.
 Empiric antibiotic therapy. Dosages should be the maximum allowed and given
intravenously. When source is unknown, therapy should be effective against both gram-
positive and gram-negative organisms.
 In adults, a third-generation cephalosporin (ceftriaxone 1 g IV, cefotaxime 2 g IV, or
ceftazidime 2 g IV) or an antipseudomonal beta lactamase–susceptible penicillin can also
be used. Addition of an aminoglycoside (gentamicin 2 mg/ kg IV, tobramycin 2 mg/kg
IV) to this regimen is recommended.
 In immunocompromised adults, ceftazidime 2 g IV, imipenem 750 mg IV, or meropenem
1 g IV alone is acceptable. If gram-positive infection is suspected (indwelling catheter or
IV drug use), oxacillin 2 g IV or vancomycin 15 mg/ kg IV should be added. If an
anaerobic source is suspected (intraabdominal, genital tract, odontogenic, and necrotizing
soft tissue infection), metronidazole 7.5 mg/kg IV or clindamycin 900 mg IV should
additionally be administered. If Legionella is a potential source, erythromycin 500 mg IV
should be added.
 Acidosis to be treated with oxygen, ventilation, and IV fluid replacement. If acidosis is
severe, administration of sodium bicarbonate 1 meq/kg IV is acceptable as directed by
ABGs.
 DIC should be treated with fresh-frozen plasma 15 to 20 ml/kg initially to keep PT at 1.5
to 2 times normal and treated with platelet infusion to maintain serum concentration of 50
to 100,000.
 Inj. hydrocortisone (100 mg IV) for adrenal insufficiency
ORGANOPHOSPHOROUS POISONING
Organophosphorous (OP) insecticides are highly lipid soluble and are rapidly absorbed via
dermal, gastrointestinal and respiratory routes. Common agents for OP poisoning are
malathion, parathion, chlorpyrifos, dichlorvos, methylparathion which are used as
insecticides.
64

Emergency Conditions
Salient features
 Clinical features include dyspnoea, tightness around chest, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
abdominal pain, excessive sweating andsalivation, miosis, blurred vision, lacrimation,
headache, giddiness, drowsiness, bradycardia, arrhythmias, QT prolongation,
hypotension, fasciculation, muscle weakness, seizures and coma.
 Diagnosis can be confirmed by red blood cell (RBC) cholinesterase and plasma
cholinesterase level which is reduced to 20% of the normal values.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Maintain patent airway: oral airway/intubation/mechanical ventilation if required
 Monitor vitals-temperature, pulse, blood pressure, respiratory rate
 Start intravenous line placement: maintenance IV fluids
 Decontamination: remove of all clothes
 Gastric lavage with activated charcoal and sample collection
 Wash skin with soap and water
Pharmacological treatment
 Inj. atropine 2 mg IV bolus, repeat every 5-10 minutes until atropinization (pulse
>80/min, pupillary dilation and drying of secretions) followed by atropine IV infusion at
0.02-0.08 mg/kg/min to maintain atropinasation (glycopyrronium can be used in place
atropine to avoid CNS toxicity).
 Inj. pralidoxime IV 30mg/kg immediately followed by 8 mg/kg/hr continued for at least
24 hours. If an infusion cannot be used, 30 mg/kg every 4 hourly.
 Inj. obidoxime 4 mg/kg bolus initially followed by 0.5 mg/kg/hr infusion Alternatively, 4
mg/kg bolus followed by 2 mg/kg every 4 hourly.
 IV crystalloids: normal saline/ringer’s lactate.
 Benzodiazepines: midazolam/lorazepam/diazepam for treatment and prophylaxis of
seizures
KEROSENE AND PETROL POISONING
Salient features
 Most common accidental poisoning in children.
 Inhalational of vapours or pulmonary aspiration can cause toxicity. The lethal dose is 30-100
ml.
 Mild- breathing difficulty, throat pain, nausea / vomiting, vision loss, low blood pressure,
convulsions, headache, weakness, burns / irritation.
 Severe: pulmonary edema, hemoptysis, mental confusion, hallucination, stupor, cyanosis,
convulsions, coma, death (due to ventricular fibrillation / respiratory failure).
65

Emergency Conditions
Investigations
Chest x ray: perihilar densities, basal pneumonitis, atelectasis, consolidation
Treatment
 Remove all contaminated clothes of the patient
 Flush the skin and oral cavity for at least 15 minutes
 If the chemical is swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk
 If the person breathed in the poison, immediately move him or her to fresh air with patent
airwaywith head low position
 Do not induce emesis
 Put the patient on monitor for vital signs – temperature, pulse, blood pressure, respiratory
rate
 Provide oxygen through nasal cannula or face mask
 Take IV line–start intravenous crystalloids as a supportive therapy
 Patients should be monitored for respiratory complications.
DATURA POISONING
Datura stramonium (thorn apple) grows in India at high altitudes. The seeds and fruits are the
most poisonous parts of the plant with hyoscine, hyoscyamine and traces of atropine, as the
active principles.
Salient features
 Gastric irritation within half an hour of taking the poison.
 Bitter taste, dry mouth and throat, burning pain in the stomach and difficulty in swallowing
and talking.
 Giddiness, ataxia, incoordination of muscles, flushed appearance of the face, dry hot skin,
rise in temperature, diplopia, dilated pupils with loss of accommodation, reddening of the
conjunctiva and drowsiness. Sometimes, an erythematous rash appears all over the body.
 Full, bounding pulse which later becomes weak and irregular.
 Muttering delirium, tries to run away from the bed, picks at bed clothes, tries to pull
imaginary threads from the tips of his fingers and develops dreadful hallucinations of sight
and hearing. The condition may pass on to stupor, convulsions, coma and sometimes death
from respiratory failure.
 Death may occur within 4-24 hours.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Stomach wash with 1:10,000 potassium permanganate solution or 5% tannic acid
solution.
66

Emergency Conditions
 Decontamination of the patient must be individualized, based on time since exposure,
type of anticholinergic agent involved, route of exposure, probable amount ingested, and
severity of the clinical condition.
 Early gastric emptying (within 1 hour) may be considered for large ingestions, when an
asymptomatic patient presents immediatelyafter ingestion.
 Measure core body temperature with a flexible rectal probe. Aggressive temperature
reduction with ice water or evaporative cooling with mist and fans should be the first
priority in the severely hyperthermic patient. Antipyretic agents and simple cooling
blankets are ineffective.
Pharmacological treatment
 Benzodiazepines like midazolam or lorazepam can be used to control agitation and
sedation.
Inj. midazolam 0.01-0.1 mg/kg IV or Inj. lorazepam 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV
 In severe poisoning, Inj. physostigmine 1.2 mg IM or IV, to be repeated after half an
hour, if necessary. Watch for side effects (bradycardia, heart block, excessive secretions).
 Inj. diazepam 10 mg IV diluted slowly may be given for convulsions.
ABDOMINAL INJURY
Abdominal injuries are quite common in this new era and it is must for a surgeon to quickly
assess and promptly manage such injuries which can be fatal. They can be broadly classified
as penetrating abdominal injury and blunt abdominal injury.
I. Penetrating abdominal injury
 Penetrating abdominal injuries caused by sharp weapon injury, missile injury/gunshot
injury etc
 History of time and place of injury,nature of injury,direction of injuring weapon
 Physical examination assess vitals, assess wound thoroughly, look for peritoneal breach
Investigations
 Generally no investigations are required before proceeding for laparotomy.
 X-rayabdomen standing can be done in cases where peritoneal breach is in doubt
Treatment
 Resuscitate the patient, secure airway, maintain breathing, maintain circulation, arrange
for compatibleblood.
 Emergency exploratory laparotomy and further management according to organ injured.
II. Blunt abdominal injury
Blunt abdominal injuries can be due to assault by blunt objects, road traffic accidents and
falls.
Investigations
 Haemoglobin levels, hematocrit, X-ray abdomen standing
67

Emergency Conditions
 USG-abdomen, CECT- abdomen and pelvis.
Treatment
 Resuscitate the patient, secure airway, maintain breathing, maintain circulation, arrange
for compatibleblood.
 Temperature, pulse, respiratory rate, blood pressure (TPRBP) charting, abdominal girth
(AG) charting.
 Management of blunt abdominal trauma depends upon vitals of the patients and organs
involved as per seen in USG- Abdomen and Contrast Enhanced Computed Tomography
(CECT) abdomen.
 All patients whose vitals are unstable are to be explored. Emergency exploratory
laparotomy and followed by management according to organ involved.
 All patients whose vitals are stable are reviewed by CECT-abdomen and pelvis and
managed according to organs involved and grade of injury.
FOREIGN BODY IN EAR
Occasionally a fly or an insect gets trapped in the external canal and cause distress and
discomfort. The foreign body could be animate-insects or inanimate, organic -seeds or
inorganic-stones, beads, cotton buds, match sticks etc.
Treatment
 Insects -immobilized using oil and remove with forceps
 Vegetable foreign bodies –remove with foreign body hook (syringing is not advisable).
 Non-organic foreign bodies-remove with syringing and foreign body hook.
 Impacted foreign bodies- remove under general anesthesia using the microscope
CHEMICAL INJURIES OF EYE
Salient features
 The common agents causing chemical injuries are alkalis (lime, cement, plasters),
acids, solvents, detergents and irritants. Alkalis tend to penetrate more deeply than
acids, as the latter coagulate surface proteins, forming a protective barrier.
 Symptoms include redness, pain, photophobia, blepharospasm and watering of eyes.
 Corneal epithelial defects ranging from scattered superficial punctate keratopathy
(SPK), to focal epithelial loss, to sloughing of the entire epithelium may occur.
 Focal areas of conjunctival chemosis, hyperemia, hemorrhages, or a combination of
these
 Mild eyelid edema, mild anterior chamber (AC) reaction and first- and second-degree
burns of the periocular skin.
Investigations
68

Emergency Conditions
 History: Time of injury? Specific type of chemical? Time between exposure and irrigation
of eyes? Duration and type of irrigation? Was the patient wearing eye protection?
 Slit-lamp examination with fluorescein staining.
 If you suspect an epithelial defect but do not see one with fluorescein staining, repeat the
fluorescein application to the eye. Sometimes the defect is slow to take up the dye. If the
entire epithelium sloughs off, only Bowman membrane remains, which may take up
fluorescein poorly.
 Eyelid eversion to search for foreign bodies.
 Evaluate for conjunctival ulcerations/defects.
 Check the intraocular pressure (IOP). In the presence of a distorted cornea, IOP may be
most accurately measured with a tonometer.
Grading of severity
 Grade 1 is characterized by clear cornea (epithelial damage only) and no limbal ischemia
(excellent prognosis).
 Grade 2 shows hazy cornea but with visible iris details and less than one-third of the
limbus being ischemic (good prognosis).
 Grade 3 manifests total loss of corneal epithelium, stromal haze obscuring iris details and
between one-third and half limbal ischemia (guarded prognosis).
 Grade 4 shows opaque cornea and more than half limbal ischemia (very poor prognosis).
Non pharmacological treatment
A. Copious irrigation
 Place an eyelid speculum and instill topical anesthetic.
 Copious irrigation using saline or ringer lactate solution for at least 30 minutes. Tap water
can be used in the absence of these solutions and may be more efficacious in inhibiting
elevated intracameral pH than normal saline for alkali burns.
 Check pH and ifnot neutral, repeat irrigation.
 NEVER use acidic solutions to neutralize alkalis or vice versa.
B. Double-eversion of the upper eyelid:
 It should be performed so that any retained particulate matter trapped in the fornices is
identified and removed with cotton tip applicator.
 Calcium hydroxide particles may be more easily removed with a cotton-tipped applicator
soaked in disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA).
C. Debridement: Necrosed area of conjunctiva and cornea should be debrided to promote
healing.
D. Hospitalization: It is required for severe injuries to ensure regular eye drop instillation.
Pharmacological treatment
The main aims of treatment of chemical burns are to reduce inflammation, promote epithelial
regeneration and prevent corneal ulceration.
69

Emergency Conditions
 Steroids
- It reduces inflammation. However, they also impair stromal healing by reducing
collagen synthesis and inhibiting fibroblast migration.
- So topical steroids may be used initially (usually 4–8 times daily, strength depending
on injury severity) but must be tapered off after 7–10 days when sterile corneal
ulceration is most likely to occur.
- Steroids may be replaced by topical NSAIDs, which do not affect keratocyte function.
 Cycloplegia may improve comfort.
 Topical antibiotic drops are used for prophylaxis of bacterial infection
 Ascorbic acid
Improves wound healing and promotes the synthesis of mature collagen by corneal
fibroblasts. Topical sodium ascorbate 10% is given 2-hourly in addition to a systemic
dose of 1–2 g vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid) QID (not in patients with renal disease).
 Tetracyclines should be considered if there is significant corneal melting and can be
administered both topically (tetracycline ointment QID) and systemically (doxycycline
100 mg BD tapering to once daily).
 Symblepharon should be prevented by lysis of developing adhesions with a sterile glass
rod or damp cotton bud.
Surgical treatment
 Early surgery may be necessary to promote revascularization of the limbus, restore the
limbal cell population and re-establish the fornices.
 Keratoplasty should be delayed for at least 6 months and preferably longer to allow
maximal resolution of inflammation.
 Keratoprosthesis may be required in very severely damaged eyes because the results of
conventional grafting are poor.
CORNEAL AND CONJUNCTIVAL FOREIGN BODIES IN EYE
Salient features
 Symptoms include foreign body sensation, watering and redness with history of
trauma
 Conjunctival or corneal foreign body with or without rust ring, conjunctival injection,
eyelid edema, mild anterior chamber reaction, and superficial punctuate keraptopathy.
Investigations
 Determine the mechanism of injury [e.g., metal striking metal, power tools or weed-
whackers may suggest an intraocular foreign body (IOFB)]. Attempt to determine the
size, weight, velocity, force, and shape of the object. Document visual acuity before any
procedure is performed.
70

Emergency Conditions
 Examine closely for iris tears and transillumination defects, lens opacities, AC
shallowing, and asymmetrically low IOP.
 If there is no evidence of perforation, evert the eyelids and inspect the fornices for
additional foreign bodies.
 Dilate the eye and examine the posterior segment for a possible intraocular foreign body
 Avoid magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) if there is a history of possible metallic foreign
body.
Treatment
Corneal foreign body
 Apply topical anesthetic (e.g., proparacaine 0.5% eye drops).
 Remove the corneal foreign body with a cotton tip applicator, 26 no needle or fine forceps
at a slit lamp.
 Multiple superficial foreign bodies may be more easily removed by irrigation.
 Remove the rust ring as completely as possible on the first attempt. This may require an
ophthalmic drill. It is sometimes safer to leave a deep, central rust ring to allow time for
the rust to migrate to the corneal surface, at which point it can be removed more easily.
 Measure the size of the resultant corneal epithelial defect.
 Treat epithelial defect with antibiotics and carboxy methyl cellulose (CMC) eyedrops, if
necessary pad it.
 Alert the patient to return as soon as possible if there is any worsening of symptoms.
Conjunctival foreign body
 Remove foreign body under topical anesthesia.
- Multiple or loose foreign bodies can often be removed with saline irrigation.
- A foreign body can be removed with a cotton-tipped applicator soaked in topical
anesthetic or with fine forceps.
- For deeply embedded foreign bodies, consider pretreatment with a cotton-tipped
applicator soaked in phenylephrine 2.5% to reduce conjunctival bleeding.
- Small, relatively inaccessible, buried subconjunctival foreign bodies may sometimes
be left in the eye without harm unless they are infectious or proinflammatory.
Occasionally, they will surface with time, at which point they may be removed more
easily.
 Sweep the conjunctival fornices with a glass rod or cotton-tipped applicator soaked with a
topical anesthetic to catch any remaining pieces.
 A topical antibiotic (e.g., bacitracin ointment BD; trimethoprim/polymyxin B or
moxifloxacin/ciprofloxacin/ofloxacin drops QID) may be used.
 Artificial tears may be given for irritation.
Follow-up
71

Emergency Conditions
 Corneal foreign body: Follow up as with corneal abrasion. If residual rust ring remains,
reevaluate in 24 hours.
 Conjunctival foreign body: Follow up as needed, or in 1 week if residual foreign bodies
were left in the conjunctiva.
72

Emergency Conditions
TRAUMATIC HYPHEMA
Salient features
 The patient presents with blurred vision, history of blunt trauma and pain in eye.
 Blood or clot or both can be observed in the anterior chamber, usually visible without a
slit lamp.
 A total (100%) hyphema may be black or red. When black, it is called an “8-ball” or
“black ball” hyphema.
 When red, the circulating blood cells may settle with time to become less than a 100%
hyphema.
Investigations
 History of traumatic event including force, velocity, type, and direction of injury should
be taken.
 Use of medications with anticoagulant properties [aspirin, NSAIDs, warfarin or
clopidogrel], personal or family history of sickle cell disease/trait, symptoms of
coagulopathy (e.g., bloody nose-blowing, bleeding gums with tooth brushing, easy
bruising)
 Ocular examination, first ruling out a ruptured globe. Document the extent (e.g., measure
the hyphema height) and location of any clot and blood.
 Measure the IOP. Perform a dilated retinal evaluation without scleral depression.
 Consider a CT scan of the orbits and brain (axial and coronal views, with 1- to 3-mm
sections through the orbits) when indicated (e.g., suspected orbital fracture or IOFB, loss
of consciousness).
Treatment
 Confine either to bed rest with bathroom privileges or to limited activity. Elevate head of
bed to allow blood to settle.
 Place a shield (metal or clear plastic) over the involved eye at all times. Do not patch
because this prevents recognition of sudden visual loss in the event of a rebleed.
 Atropine 1% solution BD to TDS or scopolamine 0.25% BD to TDS.
 No aspirin-containing products or NSAIDs.
 Mild analgesics only (e.g., acetaminophen). Avoid sedatives.
 Use topical steroids (e.g., prednisolone acetate 1% four to eight times per day) if any
suggestion of iritis (e.g., photophobia, deep ache, ciliary flush), evidence of lens capsule
rupture, any protein (e.g., fibrin), or definitive white blood cells in anterior
chamber. Reduce the frequency of steroids as soon as signs and symptoms resolve to
reduce the likelihood of steroid-induced glaucoma.
 For increased IOP:
- Start with a beta-blocker (e.g., timolol 0.5% or levobunolol 0.5% BD).
73

Emergency Conditions
- If IOP still high, add topical alpha-agonist (e.g., apraclonidine 0.5%, or brimonidine
0.2% TDS) or topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (e.g., dorzolamide 2%, or
brinzolamide 1% TDS). Avoid prostaglandin analogs and miotics (may increase
inflammation). In children under 5, topical alpha-agonists are contraindicated.
- If topical therapy fails, add acetazolamide (500 mg orally, BD for adults, 20
mg/kg/day divided three times per day for children) or mannitol [1 to 2 g/kg
intravenously IV over 45 minutes once a day]. If mannitol is necessary to control the
IOP, surgical evacuation may be imminent.
 If hospitalized, use antiemetics for severe nausea or vomiting [e.g., prochlorperazine 10
mg IM TDS or 25 mg BD].
 Indications for surgical evacuation of hyphema:
- Corneal stromal blood staining.
- Significant visual deterioration.
- Hyphema that does not decrease to <50% by 8 days [to prevent peripheral anterior
synechiae (PAS)].
- IOP >60 mm Hg for >48 hours, despite maximal medical therapy (to prevent optic
atrophy).
- IOP >25 mm Hg with total hyphema for >5 days (to prevent corneal stromal blood
staining).
Follow up
 The patient should be seen daily for 3 days after initial trauma to check visual acuity,
IOP, and for a slit-lamp examination.
 Look for new bleeding, increased IOP, corneal blood staining, and other intraocular
injuries as the blood clears (e.g., iridodialysis; subluxated, disclocated, or cataractous
lens). Hemolysis, which may appear as bright red fluid, should be distinguished from a
rebleed, which forms a new, bright red clot. If the IOP is increased, treat as described
earlier.
 The patient should be instructed to return immediately if a sudden increase in pain or
decrease in vision is noted (which may be symptoms of a rebleed or secondary
glaucoma). If a significant rebleed or an intractable IOP increase occurs, the patient
should be hospitalized.
 After the initial close follow-up period, the patient may be maintained on a long-acting
cycloplegic (e.g., atropine 1% solution OD to BD, scopolamine 0.25% OD to BD),
depending on the severity of the condition. Topical steroids may be tapered as the blood,
fibrin, and white blood cells resolve.
 Glasses or eye shield during the day and eye shield at night. As with any patient,
protective eyewear (polycarbonate or Trivex lenses) should be worn any time a
significant potential for an eye injury exists.
 The patient must refrain from strenuous physical activities (including bearing down or
valsalva maneuvers) for 1 week after the initial injury or rebleed. Normal activities may
74

Emergency Conditions
be resumed 1 week from the date of injury or rebleed. This period should be extended if
blood remains in the anterior chamber.
 If patient was hospitalized, see 2 to 3 days after discharge. If not hospitalized, see several
days to 1 week after initial daily follow-up period, depending on severity of condition
(amount of blood, potential for IOP increase, other ocular or orbital pathologic
processes).
DOG BITE (RABIES)
Rabies can be transmitted by dog bite or following non-bite exposure to mucous membrane
or an open wound (one that has bled within 24 hours) with saliva. Bites from dogs in
developing countries should always be considered high risk, and prophylaxis should be given
without waiting for test results.
Salient features
 Prodromal symptoms - such as headache, malaise, sore throat and fever last about 3-4
days. Pain and tingling at the bitten site.
 Stage of excitation - patient is intolerant to noise, bright light or a cold draught.
Aerophobia may be present. Hydrophobia is a characteristic symptom of rabies.
Examination shows increased reflexes, dilatation of pupils, increased sweating,
lacrimation and salivation. Mental changes include fear of death, anger, irritability and
depression.
 Convulsions may occur resulting in death, paralysis and coma. The total duration of
illness lasts for 2-3 days.
Guidelines for Determining Need for Rabies Prophylaxis (Adapted from Human rabies
prevention—United States, 1999. Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices)
Animal type & evaluation Post-exposure prophylaxis recommendations
 Dogs, cats, and ferrets Do not start vaccination unless animal develops
(healthy and available for 10-days) clinical signs of rabies during observation
period*
 Rabid or suspected rabid Immediately vaccinate.
 Unknown (escaped) Consult public health officials.
* 10-days observation period, begin postexposure prophylaxis at the first sign of rabies. If the
animal exhibits clinical signs of rabies, it should be euthanized immediately and tested.
Treatment of dog bite and Post-exposure prophylaxis of rabies
Three steps: wound care, passive immunization, and active immunization.
Immediate measures
 Early treatment is essential (less than 3 hours after the bite/injury occurred).
75

Emergency Conditions
 Scrub the wound and its edges with soap and water.
 If the wound is a puncture, swab deeply in the wound and around its edges.
 Follow with application of a virucidal agent: 1% or 2% benzalkonium chloride or
povidone-iodine and rinse.
 Tetanus prophylaxis should be given as indicated by patient’s current immunization
status.
 Do not suture bite wounds immediately. If suturing is required, hold it for 24-48 hours,
applying minimum number of stitches under the cover of antirabies immunoglobulin
locally.
Non immunized persons
 Human rabies immuno globulin (HRIG)- full dose should be infiltrated around wound(s),
and the remaining volume should be administered IM at an anatomic site distant from
vaccine administration. Do not administer vaccine in the same syringe as HRIG may
partially suppress active production of antibody.
 Vaccine Human diploid cell vaccine (HDCV) injected IM (deltoid area), one each on
days 0, 3, 7, 14, and 28. The vaccine should be administered in the deltoid rather than the
gluteal region, to avoid accidental injection into fat, which will prevent antibody
formation.
 Rabies vaccine adsorbed (RVA) and purified chick embryo culture (PCEC) vaccine-
administered for prophylaxis by the intramuscular route and should have antibody titers
checked at 2 to 4 weeks. It is associated with fewer hypersensitivity reactions in patients
receiving boosters and prophylaxis during pregnancy does not increase in fetal wastage,
congenital defects, should not be withheld when indicated.
 Corticosteroids, antimalarials, and other immunosuppressives can interfere with the
development of active immunity and should be withheld during the course of treatment if
possible.
 Patients with a history of hypersensitivity should nevertheless be cautiously given
immunoprophylaxis in a controlled setting, with antihistamines and epinephrine available
Previously immunized persons
 HRIG should not be administered.
 Vaccine HDCV or PCECV 1.0 ml, IM (deltoid area), on days 0 and 3.
References
1. Human rabies prevention—United States, 1999. Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP).
2. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 48:1, 1999.
3. http://www.cdc.gov/rabies/exposure/types.html; 2008.
4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Rabies post-exposure.
5. http://www.cdc.gov/rabies/exposure/postexposure.html; 2008.
6. Rosen’s Textbook of Emergency Medicine, 7thedition
76

Emergency Conditions
SNAKE BITE
India is estimated to have the highest snakebite mortality in the world, with WHO estimates
placing the number of bites at 83,000 per annum with 11000 deaths. Most of the fatalities are
due to the victim not reaching the hospital in time where definite treatment can be
administered.
Snakes inIndia
There are about 236 species of snakes in India, most of which are non-poisonous, however,
there are 13 known species that are poisonous and four of these, namely Indian cobra,
Russell's viper, saw- scaled viper and Indian krait are highly venomous and are believed to be
responsible for most of the poisonous bites in India
Salient features
 Viper envenomization (haemovasculotoxic): swelling and local pain, tender
enlargement of local lymph nodes, bleeding from any orifice,epistaxis, vomiting,
hypotension, petechiae, purpura, ecchymoses
 Elapid envenomization (neurotoxic): swelling and local pain, local necrosis and
blistering, descending paralysis, ptosis, diplopia, ophthalmoplegia, paralysis of
jaw and tongue, numbness around the lip and mouth, inadequate ventilation,
paradoxical respiration.
Investigations
 Identification of snake, local swelling within few minutes after bite is an important sig of
viper envenomization.
 Blood stained sputum and non clotting of blood are diagnostic criteria for Russel viper
and Saw scaled viper poisoning.
 Ptosis and glossopharyngeal palsy are diagnostic criteria for Cobra and Indian Krait
poisoning.
 Investigations include
- 20 minute whole blood clotting test
- Hb/ platelet count/ peripheral smear/ PT/ APTT/ FDP/ D-Dimer
- Urine examination for proteinuria/RBC/ hemoglobinuria/ myoglobinuria
- Serum creatinine/ urea/ potassium
- Oxygen saturation/ PR/BP/ RR/ postural blood pressure
- ECG/ X-Ray/ CT/ ultrasound (the use of X-Ray and ultrasound are of unproven
benefit, apart from identification of bleeding in viperine bites).
- ELISA to confirm snake species
Treatment
First aid measures (RIGHT approach)
R: reassure patient and control anxiety
I: immobilize bitten part by splinting the limb
77

Emergency Conditions
G-H: get to hospital-transfer the victim to the nearest treatment facility
T: tell the doctor about any symptoms
Do Not: Apply tourniquet, wash the bite site with soap and any other solution, make cuts or
incision on or near bitten area, apply extreme cold or herbal and folk remedies, suck venom,
give the victim drink, alcohol or drugs
 Ensure airway, breathing and shock management
 Pain can be relieved with non sedating analgesic- oral paracetamol
 Anti-snake venom (ASV) is the mainstay of treatment. In India polyvalent ASV is
available which is effective against all the four common species. ASV should be
administered only when there are definite signs of envenomation i.e. coagulopathy or
neurotoxicity
 Mild and severe envenomation requires 8 to 10 vials. Each vial is 10 ml of reconstituted
ASV. Children should receive the same ASV dosage as adults. ASV should be
administered over 1 hour at constant speed and patient should be closely monitored for 2
hours.
 ASV reactions: Anaphylaxis may be life-threatening. if anaphylaxis is evident, ASV
should be discontinued. Inj. hydrocortisone 100 mg + antihistamine or Inj. adrenaline
subcutaneouslycan be administered for ASV reaction
 Repeat dose of 5-10 vials of ASV i.e. half to one full dose, should continue 6 hourly till
coagulation is restored unless a species is identified against which polyvalent ASV is
ineffective. Only for snakes which inject massive amounts of venom, such as the King
Cobra or Australian elapids, massive doses of 50+ vials are required.
Follow up
A snakebite victim discharged within 24 hrs should be advised to return if there is any
worsening of symptoms or signs such as bleeding, pain or swelling at the site of bite,
difficulty in breathing, altered sensorium etc. Explain about the signs and symptoms of serum
sickness which may manifest after 5-10 days.
INSECT AND ARACHNID BITES
Insect arachnid (spider, scorpion) bites and stings are common and usually cause minor
irritation. However, some stings can be painful and trigger a serious allergic reaction.
Salient features
 Skin around the bite becomes red, swollen and itchy. The venom from a sting often
causes a swollen, itchy, red mark (a weal) to form on the skin. This can be painful and
itchy for a few days, but is harmless in most cases. They can usually be treated at
home.
 The severity of bites and stings varies depending on the type of insect and sensitivity
of the person. In rare cases, some people can have a serious allergic reaction
(anaphylaxis) to a bite or sting that requires immediate medical treatment.
78

Emergency Conditions
Non pharmacological treatment
 Remove a sting- by scraping it out with fingernails. Be careful during removing the sting,
prevent further spread the venom into the skin and do not puncture venomous sac.
 Minor bites and stings can be treated by washing the affected areawith soap and water,
placing a cold compress (a cloth cooled with cold water) over the affected area to reduce
swelling
 Do not scratch the area becauseit can become infected.
 Wrap an ice pack in a towel and place it on the swelling
Pharmacological treatment
If the bite or sting is painful or swollen
 Tab.paracetamol oribuprofen(children under 16 years old should not be given aspirin)
 Apply a spray or cream that contains local anesthetic,antihistamine ormild
hydrocortisone (1%) on the affected area to prevent itching and swelling
 Tab. cetrizine 10 mg once a day and topical administration of calamine lotion to relieve
pruritus
 Systemic corticosteroids may be appropriate if there are severe side-effects.
 Any person who collapses, or complains of wheezing, feeling of anxiety or faintness,
generalized itching, or tightness in the chest within 1 hour of being stung by an insect
should be treated as having anaphylactic shock. Inj. adrenaline 1 mg (as hydrogen
tartrate) 0.5-1.0 ml IM injection (1:1000 solution), repeat every 15-20 min if required. All
patients should be observed at least for 24 hours for recurrent anaphylaxis (see section on
anaphylactic shock).
SCORPIONS BITE
 Simple analgesics, such as paracetamol and aspirin, can be given to relieve pain.
However, because of the potential for severe reactions, every effort should be made to get
the patient to a hospital as soon as possible.
 Vasodilators, administered in a hospital setting within 24 hours of the attack, may
attenuate the cardiovascular response and possibly reduce mortality.
 In endemic area, species-specific antiscorpions sera may be available locally and this can
be of value if administered within few hours.
Reference
1. Drugs used in Skin Diseases. In: WHO Model Prescribing Information, 1997, WHO, Geneva.
79