Chapter 5
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM DISEASES
MIGRAINE
Most often begins at puberty and most affects those aged between 35 and 45 years.
Salient features
 Repeated attacks of headache lasting 4–72 h in patients with a normal physical
examination, no other reasonable cause for the headache, and at least 2 of the
following features
 Unilateral pain, throbbing pain aggravated by movement, moderate or severe intensity
along with oneof the following features:
 Nausea/vomiting and or photophobia and phonophobia
Non pharmacological treatment
 Avoidance of factors that triggers a migraine attack and suitable life-style modification.
Pharmacological treatment
 The combination of acetaminophen, aspirin, and caffeine has been use for the treatment of
mild to moderate migraine.
 If NSAIDs/analgesics fail, Tab. sumatriptan 50 mg or 100 mg PO or Tab. zolmitriptan 2.5
mg PO can be used.
 If early nausea or difficulties taking tablets, zolmitriptan 5 mg nasal spray or sumatriptan 20
mg nasal spray is used.
 Parenteral administration of drugs such as dihydroergotamine and sumatriptan is used for the
rapid relief of a migraine attack.
 Patients with an increasing frequency of migraine attacks, or with attacks that are either
unresponsive or poorly responsive to abortive treatments, are good candidates for preventive
agents. In general, a preventive medication should be considered in the subset of patients
with five or more attacks a month. The drugs that have been used for the prophylactic
treatment of migraine include
- Tab. propranolol 40–120 mg BD or Tab. sodium valproate: 400–600 mg BD
- Tab. topiramate :25–200 mg/d OD
Patient education
 Identify the triggers for the migraine attack (lack of sleep, chocolates, wine etc) and avoid
them.
91

Central Nervous System Diseases
TENSION-TYPE HEADACHE (TTH)
TTH often begins during the teenage years.
Salient features
 Episodic TTH attacks usually last a few hours, but can persist for several days.
 This headache is described as pressure or tightness, like a band around the head,
sometimes spreading into or from the neck.
Pharmacological treatment
 The pain of TTH can generally be managed with simple analgesics such as
acetaminophen, aspirin, or NSAIDs.
 Behavioral approaches including relaxation can also be effective.
 For chronic TTH, Tab. amitriptyline 10–75 mg at night time is the only proven treatment
CLUSTER HEADACHE (CH)
Salient features
 CH is relatively uncommon, more common in males. Most people developing CH are
in their 20s or older.
 It is characterized by frequent recurring, brief but extremely severe headache
associated with pain around the eye with tearing and redness, the nose runs or is
blocked on the affected side and the eyelid may drop.
Pharmacological treatment
 Cluster headache attacks peak rapidly, and thus a treatment with quick onset is
required. Many patients with acute cluster headache respond very well to oxygen
inhalation. This should be given as 100% oxygen at 10–12 L/min for 15–20 min.
 Inj. sumatriptan 6 mg SC is rapid in onset and will usually shorten an attack to 10–15
min. Sumatriptan (20 mg) and zolmitriptan (5 mg) nasal sprays are both effective in
acute cluster headache.
Preventive treatments of cluster headache
Short-Term prevention Long-term prevention
 Episodic Cluster Headache  Episodic Cluster Headache and Prolonged
Chronic Cluster Headache
 Prednisone 1 mg/kg up to 60 mg dail y, Verapamil 160–960 mg/d
tapering over 21 days  Methysergide 3-12mg.d
 Methysergide 3–12 mg/d
 Verapamil 160–960 mg/d
 Greater occipital nerve injection
92

Central Nervous System Diseases
STROKE
Stroke is the abrupt onset of neurologic deficit that is attributable to a focal vascular cause.
TIA (Transient Ischemic Attacks) requires that all neurologic signs and symptoms resolve
within 24 hours regardless of whether there is imaging evidence of new permanent brain
injury. However, a newly proposed definition classifies those with new brain infarction as
ischemicstrokes regardless of whether symptoms persist.
Salient features
 Symptoms include weakness, numbness, paresthesia, dysphasia, dysarthria, dysphagia,
dyspraxia, hemianopia, falls, change in personality, ataxia, reduced sensations and
impaired sensorium.
Pharmacological treatment
 Rapid evaluation is necessary for the use of time sensitive treatments such as
thrombolysis. Close attention is paid to the ABC’s i.e. Airway, Breathing and Circulation
of the patient and treat hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia if identified. Once the diagnosis
of stroke is made, a brain imaging study is necessary to determine if the cause of stroke is
ischemia or hemorrhage. CT is useful in identifying early hemorrhage while MRI is
useful in identifying early infarct.
 Blood pressure should be lowered if there is malignant hypertension or concomitant
myocardial ischemia or if blood pressure is >185/110 mm Hg and thrombolytic therapy is
anticipated (See section of hypertension)
 Fever is treated with antipyretics and surface cooling.
 Euglycemia is to be maintained.
 Between 5 and 10% of patients develop enough cerebral edema to cause herniation. Other
anti-edema measures such as head elevation, Tab. furosemide 40 mg OD and
hyperventilation are useful.
 Common complications of bedridden patients—infections (pneumonia, urinary, and skin)
and deep venous thrombosis (DVT) with pulmonary embolism are to be prevented.
 Intravenous thrombolysis (Table 1):
 Tab. aspirin 75 mg OD
 Inj. heparin 5000 IU SC
 Proper rehabilitation of the stroke patient includes early physical, occupational, and
speech therapy.
Secondary prevention of stroke and TIA
 Control of risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemia, smoking cessation.
 Tab.aspirin 75-325 mg/day is recommended for stroke prevention.
 Tab. warfarin is useful for stroke prevention with a target INR of 2-3 in patients with
chronic nonvalvular AF as well as untreated rheumatic heart disease with AF.
93

Central Nervous System Diseases
Treatment of haemorrhagic stroke
 Inj. mannitol 20% 1g/kg stat followed by 0.5 g/kg IV infusion, Inj. furosemide 40 mg IV
stat, elevation of head end and hyperventilation are useful.
 Antihypertensive agents are instituted if BP is more than 180mmHg systolic or
>130mmHg diastolic. Goal is to keep a mean arterial pressure of less than 130mmHg.
 With thrombocytopenia (platelet count less than 50,000/µl), transfusion of fresh platelets
is indicated.
 Patients with cerebellar hemorrhages or with depressed mental status and radiographic
evidence of hydrocephalus should undergo urgent neurosurgical evaluation.
 Thrombolytic agents are the mainstay (Table 1).
Table 1. Indications, contraindications and dosage schedule of thrombolytic agents in
stroke
Indications Contraindications
 Clinical diagnosis of stroke  Sustained BP >185/110 mm Hg despite
 Onset of symptom to drug treatment
administration <3 hours  Platelets <100,000; HCT <25%; glucose
 CT scan showing no haemorrhage <50 or >400 mg/dl
or edema of >1/3rd of middle  Use of heparin within 48 h and prolonged
cerebral artery (MCA) territory PTT, or elevated INR
 Age >18 years  Rapidly improving symptoms
 Consent of patient  Prior stroke or head injury within 3
months; prior intracranial hemorrhage
 Major surgery in preceding 14 days
 Minor stroke symptoms
 GIbleeding in preceding 21 days
 Recent myocardial infarction
 Coma or stupor
Administration
 Administer rtPA (recombinant tissue plasminogen activator like alteplase or
tenecteplase) 0.9 mg/kg IV (maximum 90 mg) IV as 10% of total dose by bolus,
followed byremainder of total dose over 1 h
 Frequent cuff blood pressure monitoring
 No other antithrombotic treatment for 24 h
 For decline in neurologic status or uncontrolled blood pressure, stop infusion, give
cryoprecipitate, and reimage brain emergently
 Avoid urethral catheterization for 2 h
94

Central Nervous System Diseases
FACIAL PALSY
It can be caused by upper motor neuron (UMN) or lower motor neuron (LMN) lesion.
Salient features
 Presence of Bell’s phenomenon, affection of upper as well as lower part of face, involvement
of taste and lacrimation,
 Absence of emotional facial movements and absence of other neurological findings favour a
diagnosis of peripheral or LMN facial palsy, the commonest cause being Bell’spalsy.
Investigations
 In a typical case, no investigations are required.
 In uncertain cases, it is necessary to get an ESR, blood sugar, workup for sarcoidosis or
MRI scanning maybe indicated. MRI often shows swelling and enhancement of the facial
nerve in idiopathic Bell's palsy.
 Electromyography may aid in diagnosis as well as prognosis
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Use of paper tape to depress the upper eyelid during sleep and prevent corneal drying.
 Massage of the weakened muscles.
 Splinting of lower part of face to prevent drooping.
 Facial retraining (mime therapy)
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. prednisone 60-80 mg daily during the first 5 days and then tapered over the next 5
days modestly shortens the recovery period and improves the functional outcome.
 Tab. acyclovir 400 mg five times daily for 10 days in combination with prednisone.
PARKINSON'S DISEASE
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second commonest neurodegenerative disease.
Salient features
 Cardinal features include bradykinesia, rest tremor, rigidity, gait disturbance and
postural instability. Other motor features include micrographia, masked facies, reduced
eye blink, soft voice (hypophonia) and dysphagia.
 Non motor features include anosmia, sensory disturbances (e.g., pain), mood disorders
(e.g., depression), sleep disturbances, autonomic disturbances, orthostatic hypotension,
gastrointestinal disturbances, genitourinal disturbances, sexual dysfunction and
cognitive impairment/dementia.
Pharmacological treatment
 Levodopa
- Tab. carbidopa/levodopa (1:4) 10/100mg-25/200mg 4-6 times a day
95

Central Nervous System Diseases
- Adverse effects: Acute side effects include nausea, vomiting, and orthostatic
hypotension.
- Motor complications like wearing-off effect, dyskinesia, on-off phenomenon develop
with long-term therapy.
 Dopamine Agonists-Tab. pramipexole 0.25–1.0 mg TDS, Tab. ropinirole 6–24 mg/d
 Adverse effect: Acute side effects include nausea, vomiting, and orthostatic hypotension,
hallucination.
 MAO-B Inhibitors-Tab. selegiline 5 mg BD
 COMT Inhibitors- Tab. entacapone 200 mg with each levodopa dose or Tab. tolcapone
100–200 mg TDS
 Adverse effects: Primarily dopaminergic (nausea, vomiting, increased dyskinesia). Cases
of fatal hepatic toxicity have been reported with tolcapone.
 Central-acting anticholinergic agents-Tab.trihexyphenidyl 2 mg TDS
 NMDA-receptor antagonist -Tab. amantadine 100-300 mg/day.
DEMENTIA
It is defined as an acquired deterioration in cognitive abilities that impairs the successful
performance of activities of daily living. Memory is the most common cognitive ability lost
with dementia.
Salient features
 Most common causes of dementia are Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia (multi
in fact/ diffuse white matter disease (Binswanger's), alcoholism, parkinson’s disease,
drug ormedical intoxication
 Brief screening tools such as the mini-mental status examination (MMSE) help to
confirm the presence of cognitive impairment.
Pharmacological treatment
 The major goals of dementia management are to treat correctable causes and to provide
comfort and support to the patient and caregivers.
 Treatment of underlying causes might include thyroid replacement for hypothyroidism;
vitamin therapy for thiamine or B deficiency or for elevated serum homocysteine;
12
antimicrobials for opportunistic infections or antiretroviral for HIV; ventricular shunting
for NPH; or appropriate surgical, radiation, and/or chemotherapeutic treatment for CNS
neoplasm. Drugs used for dementia are listed below:
96

Central Nervous System Diseases
Table2. Drugs used in the treatment of dementia
Drug Dose Side effect
Tab.donepezil 10 mg daily
nausea, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, altered
Tab. rivastigmine 6 mg twice daily sleep with unpleasant or vivid dreams,
bradycardia, muscle cramps
Tab. galantamine 24 mg daily
dizziness, confusion, headache, syncope or
Tab. memantine 10 mg twice daily
hypotension
GUILLAIN-BARRÉ SYNDROME (GBS)
GBS manifests as a rapidly evolving areflexic motor paralysis with or without sensory
disturbance.
Diagnostic criteria for GBS
I. Required for Diagnosis
1. Progressive weakness of variable degree from mild paresis to complete paralysis
2. Generalized hypo-or areflexia
II. Supportive of Diagnosis
1. Clinical features
 Symptom progression: Motor weakness rapidly progresses initially but ceases by 4
weeks.
 Demonstration of relative limb symmetry regarding paresis.
 Frequent cranial nerve involvement: Facial (cranial nerve VII) 50% and typically bilateral
but asymmetric; occasional involvement of cranial nerves XII, X, and occasionally III,
IV, and VI as well as XI.
 Autonomic dysfunction can include tachycardia, other arrhythmias, postural hypotension,
hypertension, other vasomotor symptoms.
 A preceding gastrointestinal illness (e.g., diarrhea) or upper respiratory tract infection is
common.
2. Cerebrospinal fluid features supporting diagnosis
 Elevated or serial elevation of CSF protein.
 CSF cell counts are <10 mononuclear cell/mm3.
3. Electrodiagnostic medicine findings supportive of diagnosis
 NCV slowing/conduction block at some time during disease process.
 Distal motor latency increase may reach 3 times normal values.
 F-waves indicate proximal NCV slowing.
III. Findings reducing possibility of diagnosis
1. Asymmetric weakness
2. Failure of bowel/bladder symptoms to resolve
97

Central Nervous System Diseases
3. Severe bowel/bladder dysfunction at initiation of disease
4. Greater than 50 mononuclear cells/mm3 in CSF
5. Well-demarcated sensory level
IV. Exclusion criteria
1. Diagnosis of other causes of acute neuromuscular weakness (e.g., myasthenia gravis,
botulism, poliomyelitis, toxic neuropathy).
2. Abnormal CSF cytology suggesting carcinomatous invasion of the nerve roots
Non pharmacological treatment
 Monitor Airway, Breathing and Circulation. Also includes mechanical ventilator support,
management of autonomic dysfunction and physical therapy.
Pharmacological treatment
 The available treatment modalities are plasma exchange and intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG). Both are equally effective. Corticosteroids are not recommended for treatment of
GBS.
 Plasma exchange:
- The advised regimen of plasma exchange removes a total of 200 to 250 ml/kg of
plasma in four to six treatments on alternate days, or over a shorter period if there is
nocoagulopathy. The replacement fluid is saline combined with 5% albumin.
 IVIG:
- 0.4 g/kg per day for 5 consecutive days
- It is both easier to administer and probably safer because there is no need for large
intravenous access.
- Disadvantage is the higher cost of therapy.
ACUTE BACTERIAL MENINGITIS
It is an acute purulent infection of the meninges within the sub-arachnoid space.
Salient features
 Fever with headache, neck stiffness, photophobia, nausea , vomiting and altered mental
status. It is associated with a CNS inflammatory reaction that may result in decreased
consciousness, seizures, raised intracranial pressure (ICP), and stroke.
 Common organisms are Streptococcus pneumonia, Haemophilus influenza, Neisseria
meningitides, Listeria monocytogenes, Group B streptococcus, less frequent organism
are Staph. Aureus and coagulase negative Staphylococcus group A & group B
Streptococcus, enteric gram negative bacilli.
Investigations
CSF analysis (Table 3)
98

Central Nervous System Diseases
Table 3. Cerebrospinal fluid characteristics of different etiologies of meningitis
Characteristics Normal Bacterial Viral Fungal/TB
Normal or mildly
Pressure(cmH O) 5-20 >30 -
2
increased
Appearance Normal Turbid Clear Fibrin web
Protein(g/L) 0.18-0.45 >1 <1 0.1-0.5
Glucose(mmol/L) 2.5-3.5 <2.2 Normal 1.6-2.5
Gram Stain Normal 60-90% positive Normal -
Glucose-
0.6 <0.4 >0.6 <0.4
CSF: Serum ratio
WCC <3 >500 <1000 100-500
Monocytes
Others
- 90% PMN 10% have>90%PMN Monocytes
30%have>50%PMN
Pharmacological treatment
Following table shows choice of antibiotic as per patient characteristics and their dose and
frequencyin empirical therapy ofbacterial meningitis and focal CNS infections
Table 4. Choice of antibiotics for the treatment of bacterial meningitis as per patient
characteristics
Indication Antibiotic
Preterm infants to infants <1 month Ampicillin + cefotaxime
Infants 1–3 month Ampicillin + cefotaxime or ceftriaxone
Immunocompetent children >3 months and adults <55 Cefotaxime, ceftriaxone or cefepime +
vancomycin
Adults >55 and adults of any age with alcoholism or Ampicillin + cefotaxime, ceftriaxone or
other debilitating illnesses cefepime + vancomycin
Hospital-acquired meningitis, posttraumatic or post Ampicillin + ceftazidime or meropenem
neurosurgery meningitis, neutropenic patients, or + vancomycin
patients with impaired cell-mediated immunity
Antimicrobial Agent Total Daily Dose and Dosing Interval
Ampicillin 12 g/d, every 4 hourly
Cefipime 6 g/d, every 8 hourly
Cefotaxime 12 g/d, every 12 hourly
Ceftriaxone 4 g/d, every 12 hourly
Ceftazidime 6 g/d, every 8 hourly
Gentamicin 7.5 (mg/kg)/d, every 8 hourly
99

Central Nervous System Diseases
Meropenem 3 g/d, every 8 hourly
Metronidazole 1500–2000 mg/d, every 6 hourly
Penicillin G 20–24 million U/d, every 4 hourly
Vancomycin 2 g/d, every 12 hourly
 Once culture report comes therapy should be changed accordingly
 Inj. dexamethasone 0.15 mg/kg every 6 hourly IV for 2 days. It should be started shortly
before the antibiotic.
 Emergency treatment of increased ICP includes elevation of the patient's head to 30–45°,
intubation and hyperventilation (PaCO 25–30 mm Hg), and Inj. mannitol 20% 1 g/kg stat
2
followed by 0.5g/kg every 4-6 hourly.
 A 7-day course of intravenous antibiotic therapy is adequate for uncomplicated
meningococcal meningitis.
 The index case and all close contacts should receive chemoprophylaxis with a 2-day
regimen of rifampin (600 mg every 12 h for 2 days in adults and 10 mg/kg every 12 h for
2 days in children more than 1 yearof age).
 A 2-week course of intravenous antimicrobial therapy is recommended for pneumococcal
meningitis. Meningitis due to L. monocytogenes is treated with ampicillin for at least 3
weeks. Gentamicin is added in critically ill patients (2 mg/kg loading dose, then 7.5
mg/kg per day given every 8 h and adjusted for serum levels and renal function). A 3-
week course of intravenous antibiotic therapy is recommended for meningitis due to
gram-negative bacilli.
 Tuberculous meningitis is treated as per RNTCP protocol.
VIRAL ENCEPHALITIS
In encephalitis the brain parenchyma is also involved. Many patients with encephalitis also
have evidence of associated meningitis (meningoencephalitis).
Salient features
 Acute or subacute onset of fever, headache, altered consciousness, focal neurological
symptoms
 Common cause are Herpes simplex Ivirus andVaricella zoster virus.
Investigations
CSFanalysis as in acute bacterial meningitis (Table 3)
Pharmacological treatment
 Specific antiviral therapy should be initiated when appropriate.
 Following table shows drugs, dose duration and their common side effects (Table 5).
100

Central Nervous System Diseases
Table 5. Dosages and side effects of antivirals in the treatment of viral encephalitis
Drug Dose Duration Etiology Side effect
Acyclovir 10 mg/kg 14 to 21 HSV,VZV,EBV nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and
every 8 hrly days Neurotoxicity (lethargy or
obtundation, disorientation,
confusion, agitation, hallucinations,
tremors, seizures)
Ganciclovir 5mg/kg every Indefinite CMV Granulocytopenia and
12 hrly, thrombocytopenia, Gastrointestinal
followed by 5 side effects, including nausea,
mg/kg vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal
pain
Ribavirin 15 mg/kg in California Hemolysis, nausea, vomiting,
divided doses encephalitis diarrhea, and abdominal pain
every 8 hrly (LaCrosse)
virus, severe
adenovirus or
rotavirus
encephalitis.
 Basic management and supportive therapy should include careful monitoring of ICP, fluid
restriction, avoidance of hypotonic intravenous solutions, and suppression of fever.
 Seizures should be treated with standard anticonvulsant regimens, and prophylactic
therapy should be considered in view of the high frequency of seizures in severe cases of
encephalitis.
NEUROCYSTICERCOSIS
Neurocysticercosis is the most common parasitic disease of the CNS worldwide. Humans
acquire cysticercosis by the ingestion of food contaminated with the eggs of the parasite T.
solium.
Diagnostic criteria for cysticerosis
Absolute criteria
 Demonstration of cysticercus by histologic or microscopic exam of biopsy material
 Visualization of the parasite in the eye by fundoscopy
 Neuro-radiologic demonstration of cystic lesion containing a characteristic scolex.
Major criteria
 Neuro-radiologic lesions suggestive of neuro-cysticercosis.
 Demonstration of antibodies to cystic in serum.
 Resolution of intracranial cystic lesions spontaneously or after therapy with albendazole
or praziquantel alone.
101

Central Nervous System Diseases
Minor criteria
 Lesions compatible with neuro-cysticercosis detect by neuro-imagining studies.
 Clinical manifestations suggestive of neuro-cysticercosis.
 Demonstration of antibodies to cysticerd or cycticercal antigen in CSF by ELISA.
 Evidence of cysticercosis outside the central nervous system.
Epidemiologic criteria
 Residence in a cysticercosis endemic area
 Frequent travel to a cysticercosis endemic area
 Household contact with an individual infected with Taenia sodium
Diagnosis is confirmed by either one absolute criteria or a combination to two major criteria
one minor criterion and one epidemiologic criterion.
Investigations
 Enzyme-linked immunoelectrotransfer blot (EITB) of serum for cysticercal antibodies.
ELISA of serum and CSF
 CT scan shows the cyst and granuloma stages of neuro-cysticercosis. Located in the
cortex or the gray white junction and present as punctuate hyperdense lesion with ring
enhancement with edema around the cyst, associated with the death of the organism.
 MRI use of contrast shows cysticerus death, visible as enhancement of the cyst wall,
which indicates that the cyst has changed into a granuloma. In addition MRI shows
vasogenic edema around the cyst.
 Soft tissue radiography can be performed to look for extraneural cysts.
 Electro encephalography (EEG): in children with intractable seizures.
 Stool examination: Presence of ova may be the sole diagnostic confirmation in children.
Pharmacological treatment
 Treatment with anthelminthic drugs can result in complete resolution or significant
regression 80-90% of patients.
 Tab. praziquantel 5-10 mg/kg single dose can be administered to individuals found to
have T solium tapeworms in their stool.
 Tab. albendazole 400 mg PO BDfor 14 days with meals.
 Tab. phenytoin 300 mg PO, pediatric dose: 4-8 mg / kg / day PO divided BD / TDS to
prevent seizures.
 To avoid inflammatory response in the CNS, the patient must be started on
anticonvulsants and high dose glucocorticoids.
Surgical treatment
 Reserve neurosurgical intervention for cases of cysts that have failed to resolve with anti-
helminthic treatment and are causing severe neurologic sequelae.
Patient education
 Prolonged freezing or thorough cooking of pork to kill the parasite.
102

Central Nervous System Diseases
 Personal hygiene or through washing and avoiding unpeeled fruits and vegetables in
endemic areas.
PARAPLEGIA AND QUADRIPLEGIA
Salient features
 Paraplegia is weakness of both lower limbs and quadriplegia is weakness of all four
limbs. Paraplegia or quadriplegia maybe caused by lesions of cerebrum, spinal cord,
motor roots, peripheral nerves, myoneural junction or muscles. The lesions of the
spinal cord may be compressive or non-compressive.
Pharmacological treatment
 The treatment depends on the underlying etiology. E.g. compressive myelopathies usually
require urgent surgical intervention.
 Indications for corticosteroids in paraplegia: neoplastic spinal cord compression,
traumatic spinal cord injuries, acute transverse myelitis, multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis
optica, sarcoid myelitis, ADEM. The dose is Inj. methylprednisolone 1 g IV for 3-5 days.
Continuation of steroids depends on the underlying cause.
 Fever: The loss of normal thermoregulation and inability to maintain normal body
temperature can produce recurrent fever (quadriplegic fever), although most episodes of
fever are due to infection of the urinary tract, lung, skin, or bone.
 Bladder dysfunction: It generally results from loss of supraspinal innervation of the
detrusor muscle of the bladder wall and the sphincter musculature.
- Detrusor spasticity is treated with anticholinergic drugs like Tab. oxybutynin 2.5–5
mg QID or tricyclic antidepressants that have anticholinergic properties, Tab.
imipramine, 25–200 mg/d.
- Failure of the sphincter muscle to relax during bladder emptying (urinary
dyssynergia) may be managed with the adrenergic blocking agent Tab. terazosin
hydrochloride 1–2 mg TDS or QID, with intermittent catheterization, or, if that is not
feasible, by use of a condom catheter in men or a permanent indwelling catheter.
- Bladder areflexia due to acute spinal shock or conus lesions is best treated by
catheterization.
- Surgical options include the creation of an artificial bladder.
 Bowel regimens and disimpaction are necessary in most patients to ensure at least
biweekly evacuation and avoid colonic distention or obstruction.
 During the first 2 weeks, use of calf-compression devices and anticoagulation with Inj.
heparin 5000 U SC every 12 h or Tab. warfarin (INR, 2–3) are recommended. In cases of
persistent paralysis, anticoagulation should probably be continued for 3 months.
 Prophylaxis against decubitus ulcers: frequent changes in position in a chair or bed, the
use of special mattresses such as water or air beds, and cushioning of areas where
103

Central Nervous System Diseases
pressure sores often develop, such as the sacral prominence and heels. Early treatment of
ulcers with careful cleansing, surgical or enzyme debridement of necrotic tissue, and
appropriate dressing and drainage.
 Spasticity: stretching exercises are recommended to maintain mobility of joints. Tab.
baclofen 15–240 mg/d in divided doses is effective. Tab. diazepam 2-4 mg at bed time
acts by a similar mechanism and is useful for leg spasms that interrupt sleep. Tab.
Tizanidine 2–8 mg TDS is another option.
VERTIGO
Vertigo is defined as the hallucination of movement, either of self (subjective) or the
environment (objective). When patient presents with this type of dizziness, the next step is to
determine whether the symptom is central (brain) or peripheral (inner ear, 8th cranial nerve) in
origin (Table 6).
Investigations
Patients are to be subjected to thorough history, clinical examination and various tests such as
head thrust test, head shaking test, Dix Hallpick’s test, calorie test, CT and MRI brain, X-ray
neck,blood sugar and carotid vertebral doppler.
Table 6. Features of Peripheral and Central Vertigo
Clinical features Peripheral Central (Brainstem
(Labyrinth or Vestibular Nerve) Or Cerebellum)
Direction of associated Unidirectional; Bidirectional (direction-
nystagmus fast phase opposite lesion changing) or Unidirectional
Purely horizontal Uncommon May be present
nystagmus without
torsional component
Purely vertical or purely Never present May be present
torsional nystagmus
Visual fixation Inhibits nystagmus No inhibition
Tinnitus and/or Deafness Often present Usually absent
Associated central None Extremely common (e.g.,
nervous system diplopia, hiccups, cranial
abnormalities neuropathies, dysarthria)
Common causes Benign paroxysmal positional Vascular, demyelinating,
vertigo, labyrinthitis, vestibular neoplasm
neuritis, Ménière's disease,
labyrinthine ischemia, trauma,
toxin
104

Central Nervous System Diseases
Pharmacological treatment
These medications should be reserved for short-term control of active vertigo. They are less
helpful for chronic dizziness and may hinder central compensation.
 Antihistamines like Tab. meclizine (25–50 mg 3 times daily), Tab. dimenhydrinate (50
mg 1–2 times daily) and Tab. promethazine (25 mg 2–3 times daily, also can be given
rectally and IM)
 Benzodiazepines like Tab. diazepam (2.5 mg 1–3 times daily) and Tab. clonazepam (0.25
mg 1 –3 times daily.
 Anticholinergic agents like scopolamine transdermal patch (for motion sickness only)
 Physical therapylike repositioningmanoeuvres (for BPPV)
 Diuretics and/or low-sodium (1 g/d) diet (for Ménière's disease)
 Antimigrainous drugs (for vestibular migraine)
 Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (for psychosomatic vertigo)
Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo (BPPV)
 A common cause of recurrent vertigo
 Episodes are brief (less than 1 min and typically 15–20 s)
 Always provoked by changes in head position relative to gravity, such as lying down,
rolling over in bed, rising from a supine position, and extending the head to look upward.
 With posterior canal BPPV, the nystagmus beats upward and torsionally
 Horizontal canal BPPV resulting in a horizontal nystagmus
 Superior (also called anterior) canal involvement is rare.
 BPPV is treated with repositioning maneuvers that utilize gravity to remove the otoconia
from the semicircular canal.
 For posterior canal BPPV, the Epley maneuver is the most commonly used procedure.
Vestibular Migraine
 Usually part of migraine aura but can occur independently. The duration of vertigo may
be from minutes to hours. Vestibular migraine typically is treated with medications that
are used for prophylaxis of migraine headaches.
 Antiemetics may be helpful to relieve symptoms at the time of an attack.(See vomiting
section)
Ménière's Disease
 Attack consists of vertigo, hearing loss, & pain, pressure or fullness in affected ear.
 Diuretics and sodium restriction are the initial treatments.
 If attacks persist, injections of gentamicin into the middle ear or full ablative procedures
are required.
 Tab. betahistine 24-48 mg/day relieves pressure from excess fluid. Initial dose 16 mg
TDS initially with maintenance.
105

Central Nervous System Diseases
Psychosomatic Dizziness/vertigo
 Important role in chronic dizziness
 Dizziness may be a somatic manifestation of a psychiatric condition such as major
depression, anxiety, or panic disorder.
 Thus, treatment with antianxiety medications and cognitive/behavioral therapy may be
helpful.
106