Chapter 8
GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASES
APHTHOUS ULCERS
Salient features
 Recurrent, painful, rounded ulcer with yellowish gray fibrinoid centre.
 Ulcer typically has recurrent appearance even after successful treatment
Rule out secondary causes like malabsorption syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease,
Behcet's disease and recurrent trauma from tooth/denture and treat accordingly
Non-pharmacological treatment
Oral hygiene -repeated mouth wash with plain water specially after eating any thing
Pharmacological treatment
 Symptomatic treatment with application of any gel containing local anaesthetic before
taking meals.
 Only in severe cases with large multiple ulcers.
 Pellets hydrocortisone 5 mg to be kept on the ulcer and sucked every 4 hours for 3-5 days.
Or Tab. prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg/day in a single dose for 3-5 days.
Patient education
 Maintain good oral hygiene.
 Avoid precipitating factors, if any.
 Ensure toothbrush has aligned bristles.
 Avoid chewing betel leaf and other condiments,excessive carbonated drinks and spicy or
sharp/crispy foods.
 Take plenty of green leafy vegetables.
DYSPEPSIA
It is a non-specific group of symptoms related to the upper gastrointestinal tract. It is also
referred to as non-ulcer dyspepsia / functional dyspepsia.
Salient features
 Epigastric burning pain, early satiety, post prandial fullness, hiccups, halitosis.
Pharmacological treatment
 Cap. omeprazole 20 mg once a day 45 minutes before breakfast for 4 to 6 weeks or
 Tab. ranitidine 150 mg twice a day 45 min. before breakfast and dinner for 4 to 6 weeks.
 Antacids 2 to 3 teaspoon or 2 tabs (chewable) when symptomatic despite above
medication.
 For those with dysmotility symptoms,
125

Gastrointestinal Diseases
- Tab. domperidone 10 mg three times a day 30 minutes Before breakfast, lunch and dinner
 Duration: Short courses of therapy (4 to 6 weeks) of the drug may be repeated or long-
term treatment may be continued for up to a year. Intermittent therapy or biweekly PPI is
also recommended in those requiring long-term treatment
 Anti-H.pylori treatment is recommended for those on long term NSAIDs or those with
Duodenal / gastric ulcers (complicated e.g. bleeding). Combination of Cap.omeprazole 20
mg twice a day with Cap. amoxicillin 500 mg thrice a day with Tab. metronidazole 400
mg thrice day Followed by Cap. omeprazole 20 mg once a day for three weeks. It is
desirable that the anti-H pylori regimen is taken for at least 14 days.
Patient education
 Avoid excess tea, coffee, fried food items and abstain from alcohol and smoking.
 Avoid unnecessary NSAIDs: prefer paracetamol especially those with ulcer like
symptoms or those with documented duodenal/gastric ulcer.
 Follow meals at regular intervals:4 hourly (including snacks)
 Daily exercise to maintain optimum weight.
PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE
There is ulceration of the gastric or duodenal mucosa due to acid and pepsin.
Salient features
 Heart burn, relation with foods. In advance cases upper abdominal pain, weight loss,
anorexia, cachexia may develop.
 History of NSAIDs or steroid ingestion.
 In case of perforation: severe abdominal pain, guarding, rigidity, shock.
Pharmacological treatment
Recommended for patients on long term NSAIDs, bleeding peptic ulcer. Preferred two-week
triple therapy (Table 1), followed byProton Pump Inhibitor (PPI)for 3 weeks.
Table 1. Preferred regimen for eradication of H.pylori
Drug Dose(mg) Frequency Duration
Bismuth subsalicylate 2 tab QID Two
Tetracycline 250 mg QID Week
Metronidazole 500 mg QID
Bismuth citrate 400 mg BD Two
Amoxicillin 500 mg BD Week
Metronidazole 500 mg BD
Omeprazole 20 mg BD Two
Amoxicillin 1 gm BD Week
Clarithromycin 500 mg BD
126

Gastrointestinal Diseases
Non-Helicobacter pylori peptic ulcer
 Any PPI for 4 to 6 weeks, 45 minutes before breakfast.
 Tab. ranitidine 150 mg BD OR Tab. famotidine 40 mg OD equally efficacious but takes
longer time for symptom relief.
Patient education
 Stop smoking.
 Curtail alcohol intake.
 Avoid NSAIDs, prefer paracetamol.
 Avoid foods which aggravate symptoms; no ride for bland diet or excess milk.
 Meals at regular intervals.
VOMITING
Vomiting is the forceful expulsion of the gastric contents due to contraction of abdominal
musculature and simultaneous relaxation of gastric funds and lower esophageal sphincter.
Pharmacological treatment
 Hospitalize the patient to give intravenous fluids in case of dehydration. Start oral fluids
as soon as the patient can tolerate. Appropriate analgesics if patient has severe pain.
 Acute vomiting : Rule out gastric outlet obstruction then Inj. odansetron 8 mg IV repeat 8
hourly if needed or Inj. metoclopramide 10 mg IM, repeat after 6 hours if needed or Tab.
domperidone 10 mg three times a dayor Tab. metoclopramide 10 mg three times a day
 In pregnancy avoid all drugs, if possible. Tab. promethazine 25 mg oral/injection is safe
in the first trimester
 If there is history of motion sickness then give Tab. cyclizine 50 mg 3 times daily.
Patient education
 Avoid stale food, cut vegetables, fruits kept in open, drink potable water only.
 Avoid NSAIDS, especially if ulcer symptoms are present.
 Prevent dehydration: Encourage patients to take sips of liquids at short intervals to
prevent dehydration.
 Endoscopy is necessary, if symptom persists.
 Prevent motion sickness by avoiding heavy meal before travel.
IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME (IBS)
A constellation of gastrointestinal symptoms associated with lower bowel symptoms that
occur in absence of an organic disease.
Salient features
 Abdominal pain,alternatediarrheaand constipation.
 Abdominal distension, relief of abdominal symptoms with bowel motions, increased
frequency of stool, sense of incomplete evacuation.
 Pencil thin stool, heart burn, bloating, back pain, weakness, faintness, palpitation
127

Gastrointestinal Diseases
Pharmacological treatment
 If pain is predominant: Tab. mebeverine hydrochloride 270 mg three times a day given
for long term or Tab. drotaverine 40 to 80 mg3 times a day
 In those with depressive symptom: Tab. amitriptyline 10 mg HS for 4 to 6 weeks
 In those with diarrheal symptoms Tab. loperamide 2 to 4 mg daily for several days /
weeks depending on the critical response.
 In those with constipation symptoms: Isotonic polyethylene glycol (PEG electrolyte)
solution 125-250 ml. Or Lactulose solution 15 to 20 ml at night
Patient education
 Diet should contain high fiber and supplemented with bulk forming agents such as
isaphghul husk.
 Avoid caffeine and alcohol.
 Avoid milk and other dietary constituents, which worsen the symptoms.
 Psychotherapy may be helpful in selected cases
ACUTE GASTRO ENTERITIS
It is a self-limiting illness characterized by diarrhoea, abdominal cramps, nausea and
vomiting, usually caused by viruses or bacteria (E. coli, V. cholerae, Staph, aureus, Bacillus
cereus, etc). Most of these are noninvasive or toxic diarrhoea. Less commonly patients
present mainly with diarrhoea with passage of mucous and/or blood in stools. This may be
associated with significant systemic symptoms like fever, malaise, etc.
Salient features
 Watery profuse loose motions which are unaffected by fasting, nausea and vomiting,
abdominal cramps, dehydration, hypotension
Pharmacological treatment (Figure 1)
 In acute gastro enteritis the aim is to correct dehydration and electrolyte imbalance.
There is usually no need to investigate for the etiology immediately.
 Further investigations are necessary if there is bloody diarrhea, clinical evidence of
toxicity or prolonged diarrhea.
 Oral rehydration salt (ORS) : given in mild to moderate dehydration , 75 ml/kg in 4 hours
in case of moderate dehydration
 IV fluid given in patients with severe dehydration (100 ml/kg). 30 ml/kg to be given in 30
minutes followed by 70 ml/kg in 2½ hours
 Tab ciprofloxacin 500 mg two times a day for 3 to 5 days. Indicated only in very ill
patients with systemic symptoms associated with bloody diarrhea
 In amoebic dysentery Tab. metronidazole 400mg three times a day for 5 to 7 days. Oral
Tab. tinidazole 600 mg twice a day for 3 to 5 days.
128

Gastrointestinal Diseases
 In acute giardiasis Tab. tinidazole 1000 mg single dose or Tab. metronidazole 400 mg
three times a day for 3 days. Hospitalization is needed when there are clinical signs of
dehydration especially in young children or in the elderly, suspected cholera, immune
suppressed patients and those with severe systemic symptoms.
Patient education
 In the absence of vomiting patient should be asked to take sips of fluid.
 Fluids used at home can be juices, soups and ORS.
 Milk and related products are avoided for at least 2 weeks, because of secondary lactase
deficiency.
Figure 1. Algorithm for the treatment of acute diarrhea
Acute Diarrhea (< 7 days)
Are the following present?
1. Severe illness: T >38.5 0C, abdominal pain,
bloody diarrhea, >6 stool / 24 hrs,
dehydration
2. Immunocompromised patients: AIDS, post
transplantation
3. Elderly patients
Yes
No
Send stool for following:
Symptomatic therapy
1. Fecal leukocytes
Antidiarrheal agents:
2. Routine stool culture
Loperamide,
3. C. difficile assay, if recent
Bismuth Subsalicylate
hospitalization of antibiotics
4. Ova and parasitetesting, if :
a. Diarrhea > 10 days
b. Travels to endemic region
Illness Illness persists
c. Community water borne
resolves for 7-10 days
outbreak
or worsens d. HIV infection of men who
have sex with men
&
Consider empire antibiotic therapy while
awaiting culture, if:
1. Fecal leukocyte positive
2. Bloody diarrhea, fever, abdominal
pain
129

Gastrointestinal Diseases
ULCERATIVE COLITIS (UC)
Salient features
 Patient may present in acute stage with bloody diarrhoea, may be associated with
systemic symptoms of low to moderate fever, backache, arthralgias.
 The diagnosis is confirmed by sigmoidoscopic examination and mucosal biopsies.
 The disease almost always involves rectum and rest of the colon may be involved to
variable length.
 Acute disease is graded as mild (2-4 stool/day), moderate (4-6 stools/day) or severe (> 6
stools/day). During remission patient may be asymptomatic or may have extra-intestinal
symptoms.
Non-pharmacological treatment
There is no specific dietary restriction but patient may avoid any food if the patient is
uncomfortable.
Pharmacological treatment
Mild to moderate acute ulcerative colitis (distal/left colonic involvement)
 Tab. sulphasalazine 1 g 3-4 times a day. Or Tab. mesalazine 800 mg 3-4 times a day. Or
Tab. olsalazine 1-3 g/day in divided doses.
 Prednisolone phosphate enema, 20 mg in 100 ml saline 1-2 time a day or Hydrocortisone
enema 100-125 mg in 100 ml saline 1-2 times a day (to be prepared fresh).
 Or if disease limited to rectum, Hydrocortisone foam 125 mg 1-2times a day.
Moderate to severe or extensive acute disease
 Start as above.
 Tab. prednisolone 20-60 mg/day in single or divided doses.
Follow-up
If the symptoms do not improve or worsen, patient will need hospitalization.
Acute severe disease with systemic symptoms (requires hospitalization under the care of
specialist)
 Inj. hydrocortisone 100 mg IV 4 times a day or Inj. dexamethasone 4 mg IV 3-4 times a
day.
 Patient should be kept 'nil by mouth' and should be given adequate intravenous fluids and
electrolytes.
 Blood transfusion to be given as per requirement.
 Patient switched over to oral steroids and aminosalicylates to be started as in I after 5
days when patient is allowed to take orally.
 If patient fails to respond to steroids, refer the patient to gastroenterologist for
immunosuppressive therapy or surgery. Once the remission is induced, steroids are
tapered slowly over 4-6 weeks period. For acute attack, there is no use of giving steroids
for more than 12 weeks.
130

Gastrointestinal Diseases
Follow-up
 Close clinical/biochemical/radiological monitoring is required for any complications like
toxic megacolon/perforation.
Maintenance of remission
 Any of the drugs used in I should be given lifelong.
Patient education
 Patient should be followed up at 6 monthly intervals and maintenance treatment should be
continued.
 In any patient who has disease for more than 10 years, a regular sigmoidoscopy and rectal
biopsy should be done at 6 monthly intervals to look for any dysplasia and total
colonoscopic examination should be done at 2-3 year interval.
 Patient should be explained about chronic nature of the disease and continuation of
maintenance treatment for life long with regular follow-up and risk of colonic cancer after
10 years of onset of disease
GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE
Gastro esophageal reflux is a normal physiologic phenomenon experienced intermittently by
most people, particularly after a meal. Gastro esophageal reflux disease (GERD) occurs when
the amount of gastric juice that refluxes into the esophagus exceeds the normal limit, causing
symptoms with or without associated esophageal mucosal injury (i.e., esophagitis).
Salient features
 Heartburn, regurgitation, and dysphasia. However, a diagnosis of GERD based on the
presence oftypical symptoms is correct in only 70% of patients.
 In addition to these typical symptoms, abnormal reflux can cause atypical
(extraesophageal) symptoms, such as coughing, chest pain, and wheezing.
 For patients with symptoms and history consistent with uncomplicated GERD, the
diagnosis of GERD may be assumed and empirical therapy begun. Patients who show
signs of GERD complications or other illness or who do not respond to therapy should be
considered for further diagnostic testing.
Investigations
 Upper GI endoscopy - Endoscopy can help confirm the diagnosis of reflux by
demonstrating complications of reflux (esophagitis, strictures, Barrett oesophagus) and
can help in evaluating the anatomy (e.g., hiatal hernia, masses, strictures)
 Manometry helps surgical planning by determining the lower esophageal sphincter (LES)
pressure and identifying any oesophageal motility disorders.
 Optional studies include: 24-hour pH probe test and nuclear medicine gastric emptying
study
Treatment
131

Gastrointestinal Diseases
 Treatment of GERD involves a stepwise approach. The goals are to control symptoms, to
heal esophagitis, and to prevent recurrent esophagitis or other complications.
 The treatment is based on lifestyle modification and control of gastric acid secretion
through medical therapy with antacids or PPIs or surgical treatment with corrective anti
reflux surgery.
Pharmacological treatment
 Omeprazole 40 mg twice day half an hour before meals. Along with domperidone 30 mg
sustained release
 This therapy causes resolution of GERD symptoms at 4 weeks and healing of esophagitis
at 8 weeks so the treatment should be continued up to 8 weeks.
Surgical Treatment
Indications for surgical treatment include the following:
 Patients with symptoms that are not completely controlled by PPI therapy can be
considered for surgery.
 The presence of Barrett esophagus
 The presence of extraesophageal manifestations of GERD may indicate the need for
surgery; these include the following: (1) respiratory manifestations (e.g., cough,
wheezing, aspiration); (2) ear, nose, and throat manifestations (e.g., hoarseness, sore
throat, otitis media); and (3) dental manifestations (e.g., enamel erosion)
 Young patients
 Poor patient compliance with regard to medications
 Postmenopausal women with osteoporosis
 Patients with cardiac conduction defects
 Cost of medical therapy
 Types of surgery: Open / Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication
Patient education
 Lifestyle modifications include the following losing weight (if overweight), avoiding
alcohol, chocolate, citrus juice, and tomato-based products. Recent guidelines also
suggest avoiding peppermint, coffee, and possibly the onion family as well.
 Avoiding large meals and waiting 3 hours after a meal before lying down, elevating the
head of the bed 8 inches. Lifestyle modification is as effective as antacid therapy.
UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING
Upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage remains a major medical problem. Causes includes
esophageal, gastric, duodenal ulcer , erosions of esophageal, gastric, duodenal, Mallory
Weiss tear, oesophageal varices,tumour,vascular lesion, e.g. dieulafoy's disease andothers
Investigations
 Hb, Abo-Rh, PT,APTT, Upper G.I.Scopy, Ultrasonography
Treatment: Primary and general management includes
132

Gastrointestinal Diseases
Pharmacological treatment
 Get wide bore access with IV cannula (16G preferable) for rapid fluid resuscitation,
Ryle's tube insertion, catheterization,
 Inj. pantoprazole 40 mg IV 12 hourly, Inj. tranexamic acid 500 mg TDS
 Inj. octreotide 100 mcg IV 6 hourly, banding-in oesophageal varices, gastric balloon of
Sengstaken blackmore tube-in oesophageal varices,
 Injection sclerotherapy- in oesophageal varices, argon diathermy-in peptic ulcers, laser-in
peptic ulcers
Surgical treatment
 Exploratory laprotomy and search for the cause and treat the cause or TIPPS (Tran
jugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts) -in uncontrolled portal hypertension cases.
ACUTE PANCREATITIS
Acute pancreatitis is the most common pathology of pancreas. It ranges from self limiting
mild pancreatitis to life threatening necrotizing pancreatitis which accounts for 10-20% of
total cases. Causes of acute pancreatitis: alcoholism gall stone disease, hypercholesterolemia
hypercalcemia, hypermagnesemia pancreatic divism, viral infections, familial pancreatitis,
others, idiopathic
Salient features
 Epigastric pain, history of alcoholism, gall stone disease, Cholesterol and metabolic
abnormalities, history of similar complains in family.
 Per abdomen examination- look for tenderness, guarding, rigidity. Look for fever,
tachycardia, tachypnoea, shock.
Investigations
TC with DC which shows increased with neutrophillia, S.amylase, increased more than 3 fold
normal value, S. lipase (more specific), increased more than 3 fold of normal value, S.
calcium below normal values, USG- Abdomen, shows edema of pancreas, necrosis, CECT-
Abdomen (in unresolving and severe cases), delineates pancreatic anatomy more clearly,
Chest X Ray, to rule out systemic complications like Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
(ARDS)
Prognostic indicators: Ranson's score, Glasgow score, APACHE II score
Non pharmacological treatment
Nil by mouth, nasogastric tube insertion,avoid alcohol
Pharmacological treatment
 Fluid resuscitation, Correction of electrolyte imbalance
 Inj. diclofenac sodium 75 mg IM 8 hourly and gradually proceeding towards opioid
analogue like Inj. tramadol 50 mg once day
133

Gastrointestinal Diseases
 Inj. pantoprazole 40 mg IV 12 hourly and Inj. octreotide 100 microgram IV/SC 6 hourly
to 12 hourly till resolution of symptoms
Surgical treatment
 Usually no surgical intervention is required for acute non necrotising pancreatitis.
 Cholecystectomy for gall stone pancreatitis after acute pancreatitis is resolved
Acute necrotising pancreatitis
Non pharmacological treatment
 ICU monitoring, oxygen by mask, nil by mouth, nasogastric tube insertion per urethral
catheterization
Pharmacological treatment
 Fluid resuscitation, correction of electrolyte imbalance
 Inj. meropenem 1 gm IV 8 hourly
 Inj. diclofenac sodium 75 mg IM 8 hourly
 Inj. pantoprazole 40 mg IV12 hourly
 Inj. octreotide 100 microgram IV/SC every 6 hourly to 8 hourly
Surgical treatment
 Pancreatic necrosectomy, distal pancreatectomy ( for disease in body and tail)
 Cholecystectomy for gall stone pancreatitis after acute pancreatitis is resolved.
CHRONIC PANCREATITIS
Chronic pancreatitis is a disease of pancreas characterized by pancreatic atrophy, fibrosis,
calcification and at times ductal dilatation. It is most commonly caused by repeated alcoholic
pancreatitis.
Salient features
 Dull epigastric pain,Weight loss,Malnutrition,Pancreatic diabetes
 History of alcoholism,History of previous attacks of acute pancreatitis.
 Usually non specific,Signs of cachexia and malnutrition
Investigations
S. amylase and S. Lipase has usually no role. X-ray abdomen, may show calcification in
pancreatic region. USG- Abdomen shows atrophic pancreas with or without foci of
calcification and ductal dilatation. Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography (MRCP)
gives excellent anatomy of ductal system. Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP), reserved for chronic pancreatitis due to peri ampullary obstruction
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Avoidance of alcohol, low fat, Low protein diet
Pharmacological treatment
 Enteric coated pancreatic enzymes, for replacement of pancreatic function,
134

Gastrointestinal Diseases
 Inj. diclofenac sodium 75 mg IM 8 hourly and gradually proceeding towards opioid
analogue like Inj. tramadol 50 mg
 Inj. pantoprazole 40 mg IV 12 hourly
Surgical treatment
 Indicated in severe pain non responding to pharmacological therapy
 Peustaw procedure ( LPJ, Longitudinal Pancreatico-jejunostomy), Frey's procedure ( LPJ
with coring out of head ), Duval procedure ( Distal Pancreatico-jejunostomy ), Distal
pancreatectomy, for lesion confined to body and tail,
 Duodenum preserving pancreatic head resection, DPPHR, Beger's procedure, for lesion
confined to head region. Endoscopic stenting, for obstruction in pancreatic duct, coeliac
block, for patients unfit for surgery.
CONSTIPATION
Commonest cause is habitual, the important contributory factors being insufficient dietary
fiber, physical inactivity, suppression of defaecatory urges occurring at inconvenient
moments, prolonged travel etc. Constipation may also occur following an attack of diarrhoea
on the day after taking a purgative; this needs no treatment. The important secondary causes
may include neurological, hormonal, colonic, malignancy, depression. Secondary causes
should be looked for in case of recent onset or constipation of severe symptoms.
Salient features
 Constipation is defined as decrease in frequency and liquidity of stool compared to the
normal pattern in a particular individual.
 Important complaints suggesting constipation include straining at defaecation >25% of
time, lumpy/hard stools, sensation of incomplete evacuation, or less than 3 bowel
actions per week.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Reassurance-since many patients with normal stools and in pregnancy, imagine that they
are constipated.
 High fiber diet and increased intake of fluid with decrease in consumption of caffeinated
drinks.
 Retraining of bowels (avoiding suppression of urge to defecate, making a regular habit).
 Bulk forming agents like 'isapghula husk' or 'psyllium seeds' also help to relieve mild
constipation.
 Regular physical exercise such as walk for 1/2 to 1 hour daily and abdominal exercises.
Pharmacological treatment
(Usually required for moderate to severe constipation).
 Lactulose Soln 15-20 ml orally at night. Or Susp. magnesium sulphate 15-20 ml at night.
Or Tab. sodium picosulphate 10 mg at night. Or
135

Gastrointestinal Diseases
 Isotonic polyethylene glycol (PEG) electrolyte solution 125-250 ml.
 Any of these may be given 2-4 times a week. Some patients may require treatment for
several weeks or months if there is no improvement.
 Tab. mosapride 5 mg 2 or 3 times a day. In some patients may be required for several
weeks.
 Phosphate enemas to be used on as and when required basis in patients having acute
problem with severe constipation or sub-acute intestinal obstruction.
Follow-up
 If patient continues to have severe constipation or symptoms worsen, refer the patient to a
specialist for investigations to rule out secondary causes.
 Recent unexplained constipation (not acute) in an elderly person whose bowel habits were
always regular should be investigated.
 Acute constipation especially when the patient is vomiting and has not passed even wind
and appears ill, suspect GIT obstruction and refers immediately to a higher centre.
Patient education
 Do not use purgative frequently to treat constipation as it may form a habit.
 Do not use purgatives to treat constipation with fever and following heart attack. A
suppository or simple enema is preferred.
 In pregnancy ispaghula is preferred.
AMOEBIC LIVER ABSCESS
Amoebic liver abscess is most common type of liver abscess in tropical countries. It is caused
by infection byEntamoeba histolyticum through feco-oral route which reaches liver via portal
circulation, causing necrosis of liver tissue resulting in what is known as anchovy sauce pus.
Salient features
 Abdominal pain in right upper quadrant,fever,history of diarrhea in past 7-10 days.
 Physical examination revels tenderness in right hypochondriac region, Palpable liver
and signs of jaundice.
Investigations
 TC with D increased, PT, APTT: elevated, Liver Function Tests (S. Billirubin, SGPT, and
Albumin).
 Chest X Ray (elevated right diaphragm, rules out perforation). USG Abdomen, CECT
Abdomen ( if rupture of abscess is suspected extra peritoneal )
 Diagnostic aspiration of abscess followed by routine microscopic and culture- sensitivity
of pus
Non-pharmacological treatment
 High glucose diet, Low protein diet
136

Gastrointestinal Diseases
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. metronidazole 800 mg TDS for 2 weeks followed by Tab. diloxanide furoate 500 mg
BD for 10 days.
 Inj. diclofenac sodium 75 mg IM 8 hourly.
 Inj. pantoprazole 40 mg IV 12 hourly.
 Vit.K injections if PT/APTT is altered.
Surgical treatment
 Amoebic liver abscess usually does not require drainage. Percutaneus aspiration can be
done in abscess having large size (>100 cc).
 Exploratory laparotomy with drainage of abscess is required in suspected ruptured liver
abscess
PYOGENIC LIVER ABCESS
It is the most common type of liver abscess in western world. It can be caused by ascending
infection from biliary tract, infection via portal blood supply, hematogenous via hepatic
artery, direct spread ( gall bladder, duodenum, colon ) or cryptogenic.
Salient features
 Abdominal pain in right upper quadrant (RHC),fever,tenderness in RHC.
 Palpable liver and jaundice
Investigations
 TC with DC, elevated with neutrophillia, PT, APTT is elevated
 Liver Function Tests (S. bilirubin, SGPT, albumin), Chest X Ray ( elevated right
diaphragm, rules out perforation ),USG Abdomen, CECT Abdomen ( if rupture of
abscess is suspected extra peritoneally).
 Diagnostic aspiration of abscess followed by routine microscopic and culture- sensitivity
of pus
Non-pharmacological treatment
 High glucose diet, low protein diet
Pharmacological treatment
 Inj. ceftrioxone 1-2 g IV BD
 Inj. diclofenac sodium 75 mg IM 8 hourly
 Inj. pantoprazole 40 mg IV 12 hourly
 Vit.kinjections if PT/APTT are altered
Surgical treatment
 Percutaneous aspiration can be done in abscess cavity and usually requires 2-3 settings of
aspirations done alternate day. Percutaneus pigtail catheter can be used to avoid repeated
aspirations. Laparoscopic drainage of liver abscess if site of abscess permits.
 Exploratory laparotomy with drainage of abscess is required in suspected ruptured liver
abscess.
137