Chapter 9
INFECTIONS
TETANUS
It is an acute neurological disorder resulting from contamination of a wound by an obligate
anaerobic organism Clostridium tetani.
Salient features
 Generalized tetanus starts with trismus or lockjaw followed by rigidity, violent, painful,
generalized muscle spasms and seizures provoked by slightest stimulation. Generalized
muscle spasm may compromise respiration, fever and tachycardia may be present.
 Prognosis and management depends on grade.
Investigations
 Clinical - culture of C. tetani from a wound provides supportive evidence. The few
conditions that mimic generalized tetanus include strychnine poisoning and dystonic
reactions to antidopaminergic drugs. Abdominal muscle rigidity is characteristically
continuous in tetanus but is episodic in the latter two conditions. Cephalic tetanus can be
confused with other causes of trismus, such as oropharyngeal infection.
 Hypocalcemia and meningoencephalitis are included in the differential diagnosis of
neonatal tetanus.
Grading
 Mild or grade 1 –muscle rigidity with few or no spasms.
 Moderate or grade 2-trismus, dysphagia, rigidity and short lasting spasms.
 Severe or grade 3- frequent explosive spasms, autonomic dysfunction particularly
sympathetic over activity may be present.
 Very severe or grade 4- features of grade 3 plus violent autonomic disturbances involving
the CVS –severe hyper or hypotension.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Admit in a quiet room orICU with minimum stimulation.
 Protection of airways (intubation/tracheostomy) with or without mechanical ventilation.
Monitorcardiovascular parameters.
 Cleaning/exploration/debridement of wound
 Maintain hydration and enteral/parentral nutrition with high calorie and high protein diet.
Pharmacological treatment
Grade 1
 Tab. diazepam 5-20 mg 3 times a day; slow IV infusion in moderate to severe tetanus; not
exceed a dose of 80-100mg in 24 hours.
 If spasms not controlled, Inj. phenobarbitone 200mg IM every 8-12 hours or Inj.
chlorpromazine 50 mg IM in adults 4 times a day.
138

Infections
 The ideal sedative and muscle relaxant schedule for each patient should be individualized.
An objective guide to decrease in rigidity is relaxation of abdominal muscles.
Grade 2
 Tracheostomy
Grade 3 and 4
 Ventilatory support
 Inj.pancuronium 2-4mg or gallamine 20-40mg IV.
 If hypotension, give vasopressor support and ifhypertension, give antihypertensive.
 For bradyarrythmias, Inj.atropine 0.6-1.2 mg IV.
In addition,give following to all patients;
 Inj. crystalline 2 mega units 6 hourly IV for 10 days or Inj. metronidazole 500mg 8 hourly
or 1gm 12 hourly. Requirement may be according to theinfected wound.
 Inj. human tetanus immunoglobulin (TIG) 3000-5000 units IV or IM or Inj. equine
antiserum 10000 units by slow IV injection after sensitivity test when human TIG is not
available.
 Antiserum should be given before local manipulation of the wound.
LEPTOSPIROSIS
Leptospirosis is an infectious disease caused by the spirocheteLeptospira.
Salient features
 Rodents are the important reservoirs. Leptospires may enter the host through abrasions in the
skin or intact mucosa, the conjunctive and the lining of oro-and naso-pharynx in contact with
water contaminated with leptospira.
 90% of symptomatic persons have the mild and usual anicteric form of leptospirosis, with or
without meningitis. Severe leptospirosis with profound jaundice – Weil’s syndrome-occurs
in 5 to 10% of patients. The common finding in anicteric leptospirosis is fever with
conjunctival suffusion. Mild jaundice may be present.
Investigations
 Culture- Blood, CSF and urine is the definite way of confirming the diagnosis of
leptospirosis
 Micro agglutination (MAT)
- Sero conversion / four fold rise in the titer a
 ELISA / MSAT
- Positive
Pharmacological treatment
 All clinically suspected leptospirosis patients in endemic area during rainy season should
be given presumptive treatment of leptospirosis and malaria. Tab. doxycycline 100 mg
139

Infections
twice daily for 7 days and Tab. chloroquine 600mg (base) stat followed by 600 mg after
24 hours and 300 mg after another 24 hours in malaria endemic areas in adults.
Note: In children less than 6 years 30-50 mg/kg/day of Cap. amoxicillin / Cap. ampicillin
should be given in divided doses 6 hourly for 7 days in place of doxycycline.
Definitive treatment
 Inj. crystalline penicillin 20 lacs IU IV 6 hourly after negative test dose (ANTD) for 7
days. For children the dose of crystalline penicillin should be 2-4 lacs IU/kg/day for 7
days.
 For penicillin sensitive patients, Inj.ceftrioxone 1 gm IV. once daily for 7 days or
Inj.cefotaxime 1 gm. IV. 6 hours daily for 7 days
Symptomatic and supportive treatment
 Care of fluid and electrolyte balance. Hypovolemia and hypotension need prompt
treatment with IV fluids. Patients with oligouria, if prerenal azotemia is suspected,
prompt diuresis should be attempted with fluid therapy.
 Headache and myalgia to betreated with analgesic. Fever with antipyretic.
 Restlessness and anxiety with sedatives and anemia with blood transfusion.
 Peritoneal dialysis has been found to be safe, simple and effective procedure for
management of renal failure due to leptospirosis. If there is contraindication to peritoneal
dialysis, hemodialysis can be done.
CHOLERA
It is an acute diarrheal disease that occurs in few hours, result in profound, rapidly
progressive dehydration and death. Caused by V. cholerae serogroup O1 or O139—i.e., the
serogroups with epidemic potential.
Salient features
 Asymptomatic or have mild diarrhoea; some may have sudden onset of explosive and life-
threatening diarrhoea (cholera gravis). In a non-immune individual, after 24 to 48h
incubation period, characteristic sudden onset of painless watery voluminous diarrhoea.
Patients often vomit. In severe cases, volume loss can exceed 250 ml/kg in the first 24 h. If
fluids and electrolytes are not replaced, hypovolemic shock and death may ensue.
 Fever is usually absent. Muscle cramps due to electrolyte disturbances are common. The
stool has a characteristic appearance: a nonbilious, gray, slightly cloudy fluid with flecks of
mucus, no blood, and a somewhat fishy, inoffensive odour,known as "rice-water" stool.
 Clinical symptoms parallel volume contraction: At losses of <5% of normal body weight,
thirst develops; at 5–10%, postural hypotension, weakness, tachycardia, and decreased skin
turgor are documented; and at >10%, oliguria, weak or absent pulses, sunken eyes (and, in
infants, sunken fontanelles), wrinkled ("washerwoman") skin, somnolence, and coma.
 Complications due to volume and electrolyte depletion-renal failure.
140

Infections
Investigation
 Identification of V. cholerae in stool examination directly by dark-field microscopy on a
wet mount of fresh stool, and its serotype by immobilization with specific antiserum.
Laboratory isolation of the organism requires the use of a selective medium such as
taurocholate-tellurite-gelatin (TTG) agar or thiosulfate–citrate–bile salts–sucrose (TCBS)
agar. Standard microbiologic biochemical testing for Enterobacteriaceae will suffice for
identification of V. cholerae. All vibrios are oxidase-positive.
 A point-of-care antigen-detection cholera dipstick assay is now commercially available
for use in the field or where laboratory facilities are lacking.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 ORS may be made by adding safe water to prepackaged sachets containing salts and
sugar or by adding 0.5 teaspoon of table salt (NaCl; 3.5 g) and 4 tablespoons of table
sugar (glucose; 40 g) to 1 L of safe water.
 Potassium intake in bananas or green coconut water should be encouraged.
Pharmacological treatment
 Euvolemia should first be rapidly restored, and adequate hydration should then be
maintained to replace ongoing fluid losses (Table 1&2).
 WHO recommends "low-osmolarity" ORS for treatment of dehydrating diarrhea. If
available, rice-based ORS is considered superior to standard ORS in the treatment of
cholera. ORS can be administered via a nasogastric tube to individuals who cannot ingest
fluid.
 Optimal management for severe dehydration includes the administration of IV fluid and
electrolytes. Ringer's lactate is the best choice among commercial products. It must be
used with additional potassium supplements, preferably given by mouth. The total fluid
deficit in severely dehydrated patients (>10% of body weight) can be replaced safely
within the first 3–6 h of therapy, half within the first hour. Transient muscle cramps and
tetany are common. Thereafter, oral therapy can usually be initiated, with the goal of
maintaining fluid intake equal to fluid output.
 Patients with continued large-volume diarrhea may require prolonged IV treatment to
match gastrointestinal fluid losses. Severe hypokalemia can develop but will respond to
potassium given either IV or orally. In the absence of adequate staff to monitor the
patient's progress, the oral route of rehydration and potassium replacement is safer than
the IV route.
Table 1.Assessing the Degree of Dehydration in Patients with Cholera
Degree of Dehydration Clinical Findings
None or mild, but diarrhea Thirst in some cases; <5% loss of total body weight
Moderate Thirst, postural hypotension, weakness, tachycardia,
decreased skin turgor, dry mouth/tongue, no tears; 5–10%
loss of total body weight
141

Infections
Severe Unconsciousness, lethargy, or "floppiness"; weak or absent
pulse; inability to drink; sunken eyes (and, in infants,
sunken fontanelles); >10% loss of total body weight
Table2.Treatment of Cholera, Based on Degree of Dehydration
Degree of Dehydration, Treatment
Patient's Age (Weight)
None or Mild, but Diarrhea
<2 years 1/4–1/2 cup (50–100 ml) of ORS, to a maximum of 0.5
L/d
2–9 years 1/2–1 cup (100–200 ml) of ORS, to a maximum of 1 L/d
More than 10 years As much ORS as desired, to a maximum of 2 L/d
Moderate
<4 months (<5 kg) 200–400 ml of ORS
4–11 months (5–<8 kg) 400–600 ml of ORS
12–23 months (8–<11 kg) 600–800 ml of ORS
2–4 years (11–<16 kg) 800–1200 ml of ORS
5–14 years (16–<30 kg) 1200–2200 ml of ORS
15 years (≥30 kg) 2200–4000 ml of ORS
Severe
All ages and weights IV fluid replacement with Ringer's lactate (or, if not
available, normal saline): 100 ml /kg in first 3-h period
(or first 6-h period for children <12 months old); start
rapidly, then slow down; total of 200 ml/kg in first 24 h;
continue until patient is awake, can ingest ORS, and no
longer has a weak pulse
 Tab. doxycycline (a single dose of 300 mg) or tetracycline (12.5 mg/kg four times a day
for 3 days) may be effective in adults but is not recommended for children <8 years of
age because of possible deposition in bone and developing teeth. Pregnant women and
children are usually treated with erythromycin or azithromycin (10 mg/kg in children).
INFLUENZA INFECTION
It is a respiratory disease of pigs affecting human beings, caused by types A influenza viruses
with regular outbreaks in pigs. Source of the virus in swine are avian, human and swine. All
three viruses re-assort and form a new virus which is a mixture of all three. At present there
are four types H1N1, H1N2, H3N2 and H3N1. The present pandemic is by influenza AH1N1
type.
142

Infections
Case Definitions
 A confirmed case of H1N1 infection is defined as a person with an acute febrile respiratory
illness with laboratory confirmed H1N1 infection at CDC by one or more of the following
tests: realtime RT-PCR, viral culture or four fold increase in H1N1 virus specific neutralizing
antibodies.
 A probable case of H1N1 is a defined as a person with acute respiratory illness who is
positive for influenza A but negative to H2 and HB by RT-PCR.
 A suspected case of H1N1 is defined a person with an acute febrile respiratory illness who
has had dose contact with a person who is a swine-origin influenza confirmed case or
travelled to a community one or more confirmed swine origin influenza cases or resides in a
community where there are one or more confirmed swine origin influenza A (H1N1) cases.
Salient features
 Symptoms include fever, headache, cough, sore throat, rhinorrhea, myalgia, fatigue,
vomiting, or diarrhea. Patients appear flushed and the skin is hot and dry. Pharynx is normal
despite a severe sore throat.
 There may be mild cervical lymphadenopathy. Illness generally resolves over 2-5 days and
recovery occurs in 1 week. Cough may persist 1-3 weeks longer and post influenza asthenia
may persist for several weeks.
 Frank dyspnoea, hyperpnoea, cyanosis, diffuse rales and signs of consolidation are indicative
of pulmonary complications. Symptoms of severe disease may include apnea, tachypnoea,
dyspnoea, cyanosis, dehydration, altered mental status and extreme irritability.
Investigations
Upper respiratory specimens, nasopharyngeal swab or wash, nasal, aspirate or tracheal
aspirate should be tested by the state public health laboratory. Real time RT-PCR, viral
cultures are to be performed to confirm the H1N1 infection.
Pharmacological treatment
The guiding principles are:
 Early implementation of infection control precautions to minimize nosocomical /
household spread of disease
 Prompt treatment to prevent severe illness & death.
 Early identification and follow up of persons at risk.
 Tab. oseltamivir is the recommended drug both for prophylaxis and treatment. Dose for
treatment is as follows: By weight <15kg 30 mg BD for 5 days , 15-23kg 45 mg BD for
5 days , 24≤ 40kg 60 mg BD for 5 days , >40kg 75 mg BD for 5 days
 For infants < 3 months 12 mg BD for 5 days, 3-5 months 20 mg BD for 5 days 6-11
months 25 mg BD for 5 days. If needed dose & duration can be modified as per clinical
condition.
143

Infections
Caution: Oseltamivir is generally well tolerated, gastrointestinal side effects (transient
nausea, vomiting) may increase with increasing dose.
Supportive therapy
 IV fluids, parentral nutrition.
 Oxygen therapy/ ventilatory support.
 Antibiotics for secondary infection.
 Vasopressors for shock.
 Paracetamol or ibuprofen is prescribed for fever, myalgia and headache. Patient is advised
to drink plenty of fluids. Smokers should avoid smoking. For sore throat, short course of
topical decongestants, saline nasal drops, throat lozenges and steam inhalation may be
beneficial.
 Salicylate / aspirin is strictly contra-indicated in any influenza patient due to its potential
to cause Reye’s syndrome.
 The suspected cases would be constantly monitored for clinical / radiological evidence of
lower respiratory tract infection and for hypoxia (respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, level
of consciousness).
 Patients with signs of tachypnea, dyspnea, respiratory distress and oxygen saturation less
than 90 per cent should be supplemented with oxygen therapy. Types of oxygen devices
depend on the severity of hypoxic conditions which can be started from oxygen cannula,
simple mask, partial re-breathing mask (mask with reservoir bag) and non re-breathing
mask. In children, oxygen hood or head boxes can be used.
 Patients with severe pneumonia and acute respiratory failure (SpO2 < 90% and PaO2 <60
mmHg with oxygen therapy) must be supported with mechanical ventilation. Invasive
mechanical ventilation is preferred choice. Non invasive ventilation is an option when
mechanical ventilation is not available. To reduce spread of infectious aerosols, use of
HEPA filters on expiratory ports of the ventilator circuit / high flow oxygen masks is
recommended.
 Maintain hydration, electrolyte balance and nutrition.
 If the laboratory reports are negative, the patient would be discharged after giving full
course of oseltamivir. Even if the test results are negative, all cases with strong
epidemiological criteria need to be followed up.
 Immunomodulating drugs have not been found to be beneficial in treatment of ARDS or
sepsis associated multi organ failure. High dose corticosteroids in particular have no
evidence of benefit and there is potential for harm. Low dose corticosteroids (Tab.
hydrocortisone 200-400 mg/ day) may be useful in persisting septic shock (SBP < 90).
 Suspected cases not having pneumonia do not require antibiotic therapy. Antibacterial
agents should be administered, if required, as per locally accepted clinical practice
guidelines. Patient on mechanical ventilation should be administered antibiotics
prophylactically to prevent hospital associated infections.
144

Infections
HIV AND AIDS
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection leads to progressive immunodeficiency and
increased susceptibility to infections, including tuberculosis. The rate of disease progression
is highly variable between individuals, ranging from 6 months to than 20 yrs. The median
time to develop Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) after transmission is 10 yrs
in the absence of Antiretroviral therapy (ART). The case definition of AIDS is fulfilled at
least 2 major signs and at least 1 minor sign are present where HIV testing facilities are not
available. In children if 2 major and 2 minor signs are present (if no other causes for
immunosuppression)
Salient features
Major signs and symptoms:
 Weight loss (> 10 kg or > 20% of original weight)
 Diarrhoea (> 1 month)
 Fever for more than 1 month
Minor signs:
 Herpes zoster (shingles), Pruritic popular rash.
 Kaposi’s sarcoma
 Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy (PGL)
 Oral candidiasis,Oral hairy leukoplakia
 Persistent painful genital ulceration
 The persistence of either Kaposi’s sarcoma or cryptococcal meningitis is sufficient for the
case definition of AIDS.
HIV disease is characterized by three phase.
 Acute primary illness,Asymptomatic chronic illness,Symptomatic chronic illness
Investigations
 HIV serology
 CD4 + T lymphocytes counts (if available)
 Complete blood count and chemistry of profile and pregnancy test
Supplementary test indicated by history and physical examination
 Chest x-ray
 Urine for routine and microscopic examination
 Hepatitis C Virus IHCV) and Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) serology (depending on test
availability and resources)
Important note: It is most important to confirm the diagnosis of HIV infection by tests
performed by a trained technician, preferably in a diagnostic laboratory. The test results
should include the type of test performed to establish the diagnosis based on WHO
guidelines. In case there is any doubt, the test should be repeated in a standard/referral
laboratory.
145

Infections
WHO Clinical staging of HIV Disease for Adults
Primary HIV Infection
 Asymptomatic
 Acute retroviral syndrome
Clinical stage I
 Asymptomatic
 Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy (PGL)
Clinical Stage 2
 Moderate unexplained weight loss (< 10% of presumed or measured body weight)
 Recurrent respiratory tract infections.
 Sinusitis,Bronchitis, otitis media, pharyngitis
 Herpes zoster, angular cheilitis, recurrent oral ulcerations.
 Papularpruritic eruptions, seborrhoeic dermatitis
 Fungal nail infections of fingers.
Clinical stage 3- Conditions where a presumptive diagnosis can be made on the basis of
clinical signs or simple investigations.
 Severe weight loss (> 10% of presumed or measured body weight)
 Unexplained chronic diarrhea for longer than one month.
 Unexplained persistent fever (intermittent or constant for longer than one month)
 Oral candidiasis,Oral hairy leukoplakia
 Pulmonary tuberculosis (TB), Severe bacterial infections (e.g. pneumonia, emphysema,
pomposities, bone or joint infection, meningitis, bacteraemia)
 Acute necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis, gingivitis or periodontitis
Clinical stage 4- Conditions where the diagnosis can be made on the basis of clinical signs or
simple investigations.
 HIV wasting syndrome
 Pneumocystic pneumonia, recurrent severe or radiological bacterial pneumonia.
 Chronic herpes simplex infection (orolabial, genital or anorectal of more than one
month’s duration)
 Esophageal candidiasis
 Extra-pulmonary tuberculosis including tuberculous lymphadenopathy.
 Kaposi sarcoma
 Central nervous system (CNS) toxoplasmosis
 HIV encephalopathy.
Conditions where confirmatory diagnostic testing is necessary:
 Extra–pulmonary crytococcosis including meningitis.
 Disseminated nontuberculous mycobacterial infection.
 Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML)
146

Infections
 Candida of trachea, bronchi or lungs
 Crytosporiodiosis, isosporiasis
 Visceral herpes simplex infection.
 Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection (retinitis or of an organ other than liver, spleen or
lymph nodes)
 Any disseminated mycosis (e.g. histoplasmosis, coccidiomycosis, penicilliosis)
 Recurrent non-typhoidal salmonella septicaemia
 Cerebral or B-cell Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
 Invasive cervical carcinoma
 Visceral leishmaniasis
Table 3. Initiation of ART in Adults and Adolescents National Guidelines, 2011
Based on WHO Clinical Staging and CD4 Count
WHOClinical Staging CD4 (cells/cu.mm)
I and II Treat if CD4 Count <350
III and IV Treat irrespective of CD4 Count
Initiation of ART in PLHIV with Pregnancy (Table 4): Same as above. Avoid efavirenz
during first trimester. Strict Monitoring for Adverse effects of Nevirapine is needed if CD4
count is >250.
Table 4. Initiation of ART in Person living with HIV(PLHIV)with TB Co-infection
Type of Tuberculosis Eligible Timing of ART
Clinical Staging and CD4 in relation to start of
Counts TB treatment
Pulmonary TB Start ART irrespective of any Start ATT first;
(Stage III) clinical stage Start ART as soon as
Extra pulmonary TB and TB treatment is tolerated
(Stage IV) irrespective of CD4 counts after2 wks &before 2mth.
Table 5. Initiation of ART in PLHIV with Hepatitis B or Hepatitis C Co-infection
Co-infection WHO Clinical Staging CD4 (cells/cu.mm)
HIV-HBV or HIV-HCV I and II Start ART at CD4 Count <350
co-infection without III & IV Start ART irrespective
evidence of chronic active of CD4 Count
Hepatitis
HIV-HBV or HIV-HCV All Clinical stages Start ART Irrespective
co-infection with of anyCD4 count
documented evidence of
chronic active Hepatitis
147

Infections
Table 6. First line ART Regimens National AIDS Control Organization (NACO)
Guidelines 2009
Regimen National ART Regimen Preference
Regimen I Zidovudine + Lamivudine + Preferred regimen
Nevirapine for patients with Hb >9 gm/dl
Regimen I (a) Tenofovir + Lamivudine + For patients with Hb <9 gm/dl
Nevirapine
Regimen II Zidovudine + Lamivudine + Preferred for patients on anti-
Efavirenz tuberculosis treatment, if Hb >9
gm/dl
Regimen II (a) Tenofovir + Lamivudine + For patients on anti-tuberculosis
Efavirenz treatment and Hb <9 gm/dl
Table 7. Second line ART Regimen for Adults and Adolescents in India
Second Dosage Dosing schedule
Line ARVs
Fixed dose combination 0–0–1
TDF + 3TC
of TDF 300 mg + 3TC 300 mg (One tablet in the night)
0–0–1
Cap. atazanavir 300 mg
(One tablet in the night)
ATV/r
0–0–1
Tab.ritonavir 100 mg
(One tablet in the night)
OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS
The common conditions and diseases related to AIDS include tuberculosis, pneumocystis
carinii pneumonia, oesophageal candidiasis, cryptococcosis, toxoplasmosis,
cryptosporidiosis, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and mycobacterium avium complex (MAC).
Diagnosis and management of common opportunistic infections is given herewith.
I. PNEUMOCYSTIS CARINII PNEUMONIA (PCP)
Pneumocystis Carinii is a fungus that infects the lungs
Salient features
 Sub-acute onset of symptoms over a period of weeks.
 Typically fever, dry cough and progressive difficulty in breathing, also weight loss, night
sweats and fatigue.
Investigations
 X-ray
 Induced sputum examination or bronchoscopy, CD-4 count <200
148

Infections
Pharmacological treatment
 Severe disease – hospitalization, intravenous trimethoprim/sulphamethoxazole
(TMP/SMX) (15mg/kg/day for 21 days), supplemental oxygen for patients with severe
hypoxemia (PaO2 < 70 mmHg breathing room air at rest). Corticosteroids, prednisolone,
40 mg twice daily for 5 days followed by 40 mg once daily for 5 days, followed by 20 mg
once daily for 11 days.
 For moderate disease, an oral agent may be used on outpatient basis, although
hospitalization should be considered. While mild cases, oral TMP/SMX can be given as
above.
Preventive therapy
 Tab. dapsone 100 mg once a day for 21 days –preferred second-line option.
 Tab. clindamycin 450 mg 4 times a day + primaquine 15 mg once daily for 21 days.
 Tab. atovaquone 750 mg once a day for 21 days.

Inj. pentamidine (intravenous) 3-4 mg/kg/day for 21 days.
II. OESOPHAGEAL CANDIDIASIS
Candidiasis is a fungal infection that frequently occurs in the mouth and vagina. It is
considered to be an opportunistic infection when it occurs in the oesophagus.
Salient features
 Difficulty in swallowing or retrosternal discomfort. Weight loss is common
 CD4 count < 100
 Usually made directly in presence of oral candidiasis and dysphagia. Endoscopy is indicated
who fail to respond to a clinical trial of appropriate treatment.
 The diagnosis of esophageal candidiasis should be reconsidered if oral candidiasis is not
present.
 Associated fever and oral ulceration are not common.
Pharmacological treatment
 Preventive therapy: not recommended because current drugs effectively treat
(prophylaxis) disease
 Antifungal resistance may develop and drug-drug interactions may occur
 Tab. fluconazole 100-400 mg once a day for 2 weeks is the treatment of choice.
Alternative treatment is Inj. amphotericin B 0.3 -0.5 mg/kg/day.
 Maintenance therapy by Tab. fluconazole 50 –100 mg once a day
 Stopping maintenance therapy when there is evidence that patient who achieves CD4
counts > 100 on ART may cease treatment.
149

Infections
III.CRYPTOCOCCOSIS
Cryptococcosis is a fungus that is inhaled and can cause meningitis.
Salient features
 Headache, nausea, fever, malaise, altered mental status, irritability and seizures, cough, chest
pain, breathlessness
 Presentation: Sub-acute with progressive symptoms over weeks to months or acute with
symptoms over days.
 CD4 count: < 100
Investigations
 Lumbar puncture to test for the presence of Cryptococcus or cryptococcal antigen in
cerebral spinal fluid. ICP is often raised.
 CSF protein and glucose are generally normal and there may be few white blood cells.
Pharmacological treatment

Inj. amphotericin B 0.5 – 0.8 mg/kg/day + flucytosine 100 mg/day 4 times a day for 2
weeks then 8 to 10 weeks. Alternative treatment is liposomal amphotericin.

Maintenance therapy by flucanozole 200 mg once a day. Cohort studies suggest that
maintenance therapy can be ceased in patients with sustained CD4 response to ART (CD4
> 200) for > 3 months
IV.TOXOPLASMOSIS
Toxoplasmosis is a parasite that has a predilection for the brain.
Salient features
 Altered mental state (confusion, unusual behavior), headaches, fever, seizures, paralysis,
coma.
 Presentation: acute to sub acute over days to weeks, CD4 count <100
Investigations
 Typical appearance on CT or MRI scans.
 Diagnosis is usually presumptive on the basis of appearance on scan. May show ring
shaped contrast enhancing lesions.
Pharmacological treatment

Tab. pyrimethamine 100 – 200 mg loading dose and then 50 – 75 mg once a day given in
combination with sulphadiazine 4 – 6 g/day, 4 times a day or Tab. clindamycin 2 – 4
g/day, 4 times a day for 6 – 8 weeks duration depending upon response. If sulphadiazine
is used, Tab. folinic acid 25 mg once a day should be given in the presence of cerebral
edema.
150

Infections

Alternative treatment: pyrimethamine in combination with one of the following: Tab.
azithromycin 1 – 15 mg/day or Tab. atovaquone 3 g/day or Tab. dapsone 100 mg/day or
Tab. clarithromycin 2 g/day
 Maintenance therapy is therapy by Tab. pryimethamine (25 – 75 mg once a day) +
sulphadiazine (50 –100 mg 4 times a day for several days with leucovorin)
AMOEBIASIS (INTESTINAL)
It is an infection caused by intestinal protozoa Entamoeba histolytica, which usually spreads
by infective cysts in stool that contaminate food and drinking water.
Salient features
 Lower abdominal pain. Mild diarrhea develops gradually and may lead to full blown
dysentery. 0-12 stools per day with blood and mucus and little fecal matter.
 Caecal involvement may mimic acute appendicitis. Chronic form i.e. amoebic colitis,
can be confused with inflammatory bowel disease.
 Untreated or incompletely treated intestinal infection may result in amoebic liver
abscess and involvement of other extra intestinal site.
Investigations
 Demonstration of cysts and/or trophozoites of Entamoeba histolytica in the stool.
Pharmacological treatment
 Asymptomatic cyst passers- Tab. diloxanide furoate 500 mg TDS for 10 days
 Acute amoebic dysentery and chronic infection
Tab. metronidazole 400 – 800 mg 8 hourly PO for 10 days. In children 15 mg/kg divided
in three doses for 7 days or Tab. tinidazole (300 mg, 500 mg and 1 g) 2 g orally as single
-
dose. In children 50 mg/kg/day in three divided doses for 10 days
Followed by Tab. diloxanide furoate 500 mg 8 hourly for 10 days
-
GIARDIASIS
It is an intestinal disease caused by parasite Giardia lamblia that spreads by direct faeco-oral
transmission.
Salient features
 Acute giardiasis-although diarrhea is common, upper intestinal manifestations such as
abdominal pain, bloating, belching, flatus, nausea and vomiting may predominate.
 Chronic giardiasis – history of one or more episodes of acute diarrhea, increased flatus, loose
stools, abdominal distension, borborygmi, eructation of foul tasting gas and passage of foul
smelling flatus, and weight loss.
 Symptoms could be intermittent, recurring and gradually debilitating: severe disease may
result in malabsorption, weight loss, growth retardation and dehydration.
151

Infections
Investigations
 Demonstration of cysts and or trophozoites in the stools.
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. tinidazole 2 g as single dose in adults. In children 50 mg/kg as a single dose Or
 Tab. metronidazole 400 mg every TDS for 7 days in adults. In children 15 mg/kg divided
in three doses for 7 days.
Patient education
 Infections spread by ingestion of food or water contaminated with cysts. Properly cooked
food, use of clean drinking water, proper sanitation and good personal hygiene- hand
washing with soap after defecation and before meals may prevent infection.
 Infection can be minimized by avoiding unpeeled fruits and vegetables.
 Side effects are usually mild and transient and include nausea, vomiting, abdominal
discomfort, metallic taste and a disulfiram like reaction, therefore, avoid use of alcohol
during treatment.
HOOKWORM INFESTATION
The majority of worm infestations are asymptomatic Infections caused by A.duodenale and
N.americanus. The infective larvae penetrate through skin usually the food and travel
through subcutaneous issue to the intestines. The adult forms live in the jejunum and feed on
blood, thus leading to chronic blood loss and anemia.
Salient features
 Asymptomatic or present with symptoms of anemia (Hypochromic microcytic).
 Pruritic maculopapular dermatitis (ground itch) at site of skin penetration by infective larvae,
serpigenous tracts of subcutaneous migration in previously sensitized host.
 Mild transient pneumonitis because of larvae migration through lungs.
 Intestinal manifestations – epigastric pain often with post-prandial accentuation,
inflammatory diarrhea.
 Major consequences –progressive iron deficiency anemia and hypoproteinemia
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. mebendazole 100mg BD for 3 days in children above 2 years of age.
(Caution: contraindicated in children less than 2 years) or
 Tab.pyrantel pamoate (250mg); once daily for 3 days.
(Caution; not used in children below 1 year of age)
 In children more than 1 year, susp. pyrental palmoate 10mg/kg as a single dose or Tab
albendazole 400mg to be given as a single dose. In children between 1-2 years of age
syrup albendazole 200mg as a single dose. In children more than 2 years of age syrup
albendazole 400 mg as a single dose.
152

Infections
Patient education
 Hookworm infestation occurs through skin penetration by the infective larvae.
 The disease can be prevented by use of boots and gloves while working in the fields.
ASCARIASIS (ROUNDWORM INFESTATION)
Ascariasis is caused by Ascaris lumbricoides, the largest nematode parasite of humans
reaching up to 40 cm in length. The worm is located in the large intestine.
Salient features
 Most individuals are asymptomatic. Features of pulmonary involvement because of larval
migration include irritating nonproductive cough, bronchospasm or pneumonitis and burring
substernal discomfort aggravated by coughing or deep inspiration, dyspnoea, fever,
eosinophilic pneumonities.
 Small bowel obstruction may get complicated by perforation intussusceptions or volvulus.
 Aberrant migration of a large worm may cause biliary colic, cholangitis, cholecystitis
pancreatic and oral expulsion of the worm.
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab mebendazole 100 mg 12 hourly for 3 days in children above 2 years of age. (Caution:
contraindicated in children < 2 years)
 Tab. pyrantel pamoate 11 mg/kg as a single dose or Tab. albendazole 400 mg as a single
dose. In heavy infestation, however, a 2-3 day course is indicated. (Caution:
contraindicated in pregnancy)
 In children between 1 – 2 years of age Syr. albendazole 200 mg as a single dose. In
children more than 2 years, Syr. albendazole 400 mg as a single dose.
Patient education
Proper sanitation and good personal hygiene- hand washing with soap after defecation and
before meals may prevent infection. Avoid unpeeled fruits and vegetables and use of clean
drinking water.
ENTEROBIASIS
Infection is caused by Enterobius vermicularis (Pin worm). Adult pinworm is around 1 cm
long and dwells in the bowel lumen in the small and large intestine around caecum area.
Salient features
 Most infestations are asymptomatic. Cardinal symptoms are perianal pruritis, worse at night
due to migration of female worms. Excessive itching can lead to perianal excoriation and
bacterial superinfection. Heavy infection causes abdominal pain and weight loss.
 Rarely, in female’s vulvovaginitis and pelvic or peritoneal granulomas occur.Eosinophilia.
153

Infections
Investigations
Demonstration of the ova of Enterobius vermicularis in perianal swabs or a cellophane tape
should be pressed against perianal skin. In the morning, when the child gets up, eggs stick to
the tape and can be examined under the microscope.
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. mebendazole 100 mg as a single dose in adults and children more than 2 years of
age. (Contraindicated in pregnancy and in children below one year of age). Or Tab.
pyrantel pamoate 11 mg/kg body weight as a single dose. Or Tab. albendazole 400 mg as
a single dose.
 Children (1-2 years) Syr. albendazole 200 mg as a single dose; More than 2 years 400 mg
as a single dose.
 Repeat treatment after two weeks.
Assessment of response of worm infestation to therapy
 Repeat stool, perianal swab examination for ova of Enterobius vermicularis.
 Absolute eosinophil count, haemoglobin and peripheral blood smear examination at
monthly intervals for 3-6 months.
 Serum albumin level in hookworm infection.
Patient education
 Treatment of all family members is required to eliminate asymptomatic reservoirs of
potential re infection.
 Proper sanitation and good personal hygiene, hand washing with soap after defecation
and before meals may prevent infection.
 Infection can be minimized by avoidance of unpeeled fruits and vegetables and use of
clean drinking water. Regular washing and disinfection of linen.
FILARIASIS
Filariasis is caused bywuchereria bancrofti in 90% of cases. Lymphatics are mainly affected,
resulting in gross limb swellings.
Salient features
 In acute presentation episodic attacks of fever with lymphadenitis and lymphangitis.
Occasionally adult worms may be felt subcutaneously.
 Chronic presentation as a case of lymphatic obstruction due to worm or fibrosis causing
massive lower limb oedema, non pitting type, with skin thickening, hydrocele,
chyluria, chylous ascitis, chylothorax.
Investigations: Total and differential count shows eosinophilia. Immature worms
(microfilaria) seen in nocturnal peripheral blood smears.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Manual lymphoedema drainage
154

Infections
 Multilayer lymphoedema bandage
 Compression garments,exercise
 Skin care to prevent athlete foot with 3% benzoic acid, for dry skin paraffin ointment, for
hyperkeratosis 5% salicylic acid,
Pharmacological treatment
Tab.diethylcarbamazine 6mg/kg for 21 days .for acute cases and antipyretics for fever
Surgical treatment
 Bypass procedures
 Omental pedicle
 Nodovenous shunt
 Limb reduction procedures
155