Chapter 10
ENT DISEASES
EAR-WAX
External ear wax is the accumulated secretion from ceremonious gland situated in outer part
of meatus may form a solid, often hard mass giving rise to deafness and discomfort in the ear.
Salient features
 Blocked ear and pain
 Tinnitus,reflex cough on manipulation,vertigo
Investigations
 Otoscopy
 Brownish-black mass in external auditory canal.
Pharmacological treatment
 For severe pain Tab. ibuprofen 400 mg SOS, in children 20 g/kg/day divided into 3 doses.
 Wax softener (turpentine oil - 15%, benzocaine - 2.7%), chlorbutol - 5%,
paradichlorobenzene-2%) 3-4 days before cleaning the ear when the wax is hard.
 Followed by surgical removal (to be carried out by an Otolaryngologist).
 Syringing with sterile saline solution at body temperature pushed along the posterior wall
of the meatus to take out the wax. The meatus should be mopped dry after syringing.
(Caution: if there is previous history of ear discharge or perforated drum or instrumental
manipulation with ringprobe, hook or forceps and suction cleaning).
Patient education
 Wax is a normal secretion and provides protection to the ear drum and should be removed
only if it disturbs hearing.
 Avoid cleaning the ear with buds as it can push the wax to the deeper canal.
References
1. Diseases of the External Ear. In: Logan Turner's Diseases of the Nose, Throat and Ear, 10th Edition, pp
265-67.
KERATOSIS OBTURANS
Collection of desquamated epithelium mixed with wax in external auditory canal causing
ballooning of the canal is known as Keratosis obturans.
Salient features
 Difficulty in hearingand severe pain
 Serosanginuous discharge
156

ENT Diseases
Investigations
Otoscopy - cerumen admixed with desquamated debris, external canal granulations and bone
erosion
Treatment
 Initially soften the mass with sodium bicarbonate ear drops daily for several days
followed by syringing.
 Removal under general anaesthesia using microscope.
FURUNCLE
Furuncle is the infection of the root of a hair follicle caused by staphylococcus aureus in
cartilaginous external auditory canal.
Salient features
 Blocked ear, movement of pinna painful
 Severe pain and occasionally discharge
 Regional lymphadenitis
Investigations
 History of recent cold and influenza, sign of middle ear infection
 Otoscopy examination may reveal boils
 Maximum tenderness over tragus and post-auricular lymphadenitis
 Obliteration of post aural sulcus with forward displacement of aurical
 Mastoid radiograph show well developed clear cell on affected side
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Local heat
Pharmacological treatment
 10% ichthamol in glycerine wick pack or antibiotic steroid cream wick pack (polymyxin
B sulphate 500 IU, neomycin sulphate 3400 IU, zinc bacitracin 400 IU, hydrocortisone 10
mg, per g) wick packing to be done on alternate day till swelling subsides followed by/or
 Local ear drops (polymyxin B sulphate 1000 U, neomycin sulphate 3400 U,
hydrocortisone 10 mg/ml).
 Systemic antibacterial like Cap. amoxicillin 500mg TDS 5-7 days or azithromycin 500mg
ODfor 3-5 days antibiotics
 Tab. ibuprofen 400 mg as and when required or Tab. nimesulide 100 mg twice a day.
 Incision and drainage may be necessary in some cases.
Patient education
 Patients with recurrent boils, diabetes mellitus should be ruled out
 Avoid ear picking.
157

ENT Diseases
OTOMYCOSIS
Otomycosis is the fungal infection of the ear canal. Secondary growth occurs in patients
using topical antibiotics for otitis externa or middle ear suppuration.
Salient features
 Irritation and itching of ear discharge (thick white debris like.)
 If the discharge is white like blotting paper – candida, black mass with mycelia –
aspergillus Niger and pale blue and green –aspergillus fumigatus.
Investigations
 Direct otoscopic examination
 Microscopic examination in 10% KOH
 Culture in sabourd’s Dextrose agar
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Regular ear toilet-by suction/dry mopping/instrumentation.
Pharmacological treatment
 Topical clotrimazole as 1% powder or liquid 3 - 4 times a day to be continued for at least
aweek after clinical resolution of the infection.
 Tab. ibuprofen 400 mg as and when required. In children 20 mg/kg/day in 3 divided
doses.
Patient education
 Ear is to be kept dry; entry of water into the ear should be prevented.
References
1. Diseases ofthe External Ear. In: Logan Turner's Diseases of the Nose, Throat and Ear, 10th Edition, pp 274-
75.
2. External Auditory Meatus. In: Scott- Brown's Otolaryngology, JB Booth (ed) Vol 3, 6th Edition, 1997,
Butterworth-Heinemann, pp 3/6/14-15.
MALIGNANT OTITIS EXTERNA
External otitis in diabetic patients or those who are using immunosuppressive drugs due to
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection
Salient features
 Severe pain and swelling around the ear / facial weakness
Investigations
 Otoscopy shows external canal inflammation and granulation
 Cranial nerve paralysis or facial palsy is common
 To exclude diabetes / CT scan temporal bone to rule out osteomyelitis of temporal bone.
158

ENT Diseases
Pharmacological treatment
 Topical anti-pseudomonal antibacterials (ciprofloxacin, carbenicillin, amikacin,
tobramycin, ticarcillin, third generation cephalosporins)
 Surgical debridement of devitalised tissue and bone to be done judiciously.
ACUTE SUPPURATIVE OTITIS MEDIA
It is an acute inflammation of middle ear caused by pyogenic organism. It is common in
children, associated with upper respiratory infection and exanthematous fevers.
Salient features
 Pain, fever and ear discharge
 Hearing impairment and tinnitus
 Symptoms in children include fever, vomiting, diarrhea, sleeplessness, incessant cry and
irritability
Investigations
 Otoscopy shows congested and bulging tympanic membrane
 Mucopurulent discharge
Non pharmacological treatment
 Steam inhalation and to keep the ear clean in case of pus discharge.
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. paracetamol 500 mg SOS
 Cap. amoxicillin 250-500 mg 8 hourly for 7 days. In complicated cases and children <2
years duration of treatment 10 days or Cap. cephalexin 250-500 mg 8 hourly. In children
20-40 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses. Switch antibiotics if no clinical improvement by 3rd
day.
 Xylometazoline HC1 0.1% 1-2 nasal drops in each nostril 1-2 times daily.
In Children (0.05%) 1-2 nasal drops 1-2 times daily or oxymetazoline 0.05% 1-2 nasal
drops in each nostril 2 times daily. In Children (0.01%) 1-2 drops 2 times daily.
 Refer to an Otolaryngologist if there is intense pain, bulging of the ear drum or persisting
fever despite treatment for myringotomy.
Patient education
 Treat upper respiratory and sinus infections at the earliest.
References
1. Acute Suppurative Otitis Media and Acute Mastoiditis. In: Scott Brown's Otolaryngology, Vol 3, JB Booth
6th Edition, pp 3/9/1-15.
2. Acute Otitis Media in Adults. In: Logan Turner's Diseases of the Nose, Throat and Ear 10th Edition, pp 280-
81.
3. Diseases of the Middle Ear Cleft. In: A Synopsis of Otolaryngology, 4th Edition, 91-109.
159

ENT Diseases
CHRONIC SUPPURATIVE OTITIS MEDIA
Chronic Suppurative Otitis Media(CSOM) a long standing infection of middle ear clef,
characterized by ear discharge and permanent perforation of tympanic membrane. It is
classified as tubo tympanic disease (safe ear) and attico-antral disease (unsafe ear).
Salient features
 Ear discharge-Mucopurulent / intermittent / not foul smelling / profuse / not blood
stained. Associated with upper respiratory tract infection
 Hearing loss (conductive) and Tinnitus
 There are two stages-active and inactive (no discharge, only hearing loss)
 Proteus, Pseudomonas, Klebsiella, E. Coli., Staphylococcus aureus are the most
common organisms. While anaerobes organisms include Bacteroides fragilis (most
common)and anaerobic Streptococci.
Investigations
 Otoscopy shows discharge mucopurulent / mucoid / dry,perforation –central perforation
 Conductive deafness (tuning fork test) (confirm degree and type of hearing loss)
 Middle ear mucosa -normal in quiescent stage, edematous and velvety in active stage
 Examination under microscope,audiogram
 Pus culture and sensitivity
 X-ray mastoids -both ears sclerotic. May be pneumatised with clouding of air cells to
assess co-morbid status
 HRCT temporal bone which help in (1) establishing cholesteatoma (2) operative planning
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Aural toilet by dry mopping or careful suction.
Pharmacological treatment
 Topical antibiotics like ciprofloxacin HC1 0.3% w/v ear drops 2-3 drops 3-4 times daily
 When associated with marked inflammation, add prednisolone 0.5% + chloramphenicol
5% + lignocaine 2% + acetic acid 2% to be used as 3-4 drops 3-4 times daily.
 For profuse mucopurulent discharge and associated upper respiratory tract infection
(URTI), Cap. amoxicillin 750-1500 mg in 3 divided doses. In children 20-40 mg/kg in 3
divided doses. The choice of antibiotic depends on the culture and sensitivity report.
Surgical treatment
 Once the ear is dry and any local nidus of infection has been treated the ear can be taken
up for myringoplasty after assessing the hearing status.
Patient education
 Avoid water or dust to enter the ear. Explain the patient to take immediate treatment in
case of URTI. Not to instill oil if there is a discharge from the ear or if the patient is
known to have perforation of ear drum.
160

ENT Diseases
References
1. Diseases of the External Ear. In: Logan Turner's Diseases ofthe Nose, Throat and ear 10th Edition, pp 271-
73.
2. Management of Chronic Suppurative Otitis Media. In: Scott Brown's Otolaryngology', JB Boothy (ed), Vol
3, 6th Edition, 1997, pp 3/10/1-11.
SEROUS OTITIS MEDIA
It is characterized by the presence of non-purulent fluid in middle ear cleft which may be due
to Eustachian tube dysfunction, unresolved acute otitis media or viral infection. It is one stage
further then Eustachian tube catarrh where fluid having a consistency of glue collects in the
middle ear producing conductive deafness.
Salient features
 Deafness, sensation of fluid, tinnitus. Earache and ear drum appear to be normal,
lusterless retracted or fluid level or air bubbles may be seen behind the drum.
Investigations
 Audiogram reveal conductive deafness
 Impedance audiometry show flat type of curve (B curve)
Pharmacological treatment
 Cap. amoxycillin 250 mg with clavulanic acid 375 mg, TDS beforemeals for 21 days.
 Tab.pseudoephedrine120 mg 8 hourly. In children 1-2 mg/kg twice daily.
Surgical treatment
 For patients not responding to long term pharmacological measures. This include
myringotomy with or without grommet insertion, adenoidectomy, treatment for sinusitis
and even mastoidotomy in refractory cases.
Patient education
 Do not instill oil in the ear.
References
1. Management of Chronic Otitis Media. In: Scott Brown's Otolaryngology, JB Booth (ed), Vol. 3, 6th
Edition, 1997, Butterworth-Heinemann, pp 3/9/1-15.
ACUTE SINUSITIS
It is inflammation of paranasal sinuses. Acute maxillary sinusitis is the commonest type of
sinusitis while acute ethmoidal sinusitis is more common in infants and children.
Salient features
 Headache, nasal obstruction, hawking and postnasal drip.Fever, malaise, congested
nasal mucosa, pus in the middle meatus and tender sinuses.
161

ENT Diseases
Investigations
 X ray paranasal sinuses –Water’s view-haziness or opacity /fluid level.
 CT-para nasal sinuses in selected cases where WBC, ESR, Positive blood culture confirm
 Trans illumination test reveal opaque sinuses
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Steam inhalation via nose 2-3 times/dayfor 2-3 days and rest.
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. paracetamol 500 mg 3-4 times a day for 5 days (children 10 kg/dose) or Tab.
ibuprofen 400 mg-600 mg 3 times a day for 5 days (children 10 mg/kg/dose.)
 Cap. amoxicillin 500 mg 8 hourly for 5-7 days (children 50 mg/kg/day).
Sinusitis of dental origin
 Cap. amoxicillin 500 mg 3 times a day for 5-7 days.
 Tab. metronidazole 400 mg 3 times a day for 5-7 days.
 Tab. bromhexine 8 mg 3 times a day for 7 days.
If nasal obstruction or rhinorrhoea,
 Normal saline nasal 1-2 drops in each nostril 2-3 times a day. Or ephedrine 0.75% nasal
drops in isotonic saline 1-2 drops in each nostril 2 times a day. In children 0.5% 1-2 drops
in each nostril 2 times daily. Or oxymetazoline HCl 0.05% nasal drops. 1-2 drops in each
nostril 2 times a day. In children 0.025% 1-2 drops in each nostril 2 times daily.
 Xylometazoline 0.1% nasal drops 2-3 drops in each nostril 2-3 times a day. In Children
0.05% 1-2 drops in each nostril 2 times daily.
(Caution: Medicated nasal drops should not be used for more than 7 days).
Improvement is seen in symptoms viz. pain tenderness, nasal obstruction and discharge
within 48-72 hours after initiation of therapy. If there is no desirable response patient should
be referred to an Otolaryngologist.
Patient education
 To take full course of systemic antibiotics to avoid the risk of developing antimicrobial
resistance.
 Prolonged use of topical decongestants more than a week to be avoided as it can cause
atrophic rhinitis, anosmia and rhinitis medicamentosa.
References
1. Acute Rhinosinusitis. In: Logan Turner's Diseases of Nose, Throat and Ear. 10th Edition pp 34-6.
EPISTAXIS
Epistaxis is defined as bleeding through the nose. The common cause in children may be due
to nose picking, in adolescents (especially males) due to juvenile nasopharyngeal
angiofibroma and hypertension /neoplasm in elderly.
162

ENT Diseases
Investigations
 Baseline investigations including complete hemogram, coagulation profile, blood
grouping and typing
 Xrayparanasal sinuses and CT para nasal sinuses –if necessary
Treatment
 Resuscitative measures if clinical parameters suggestive of hemodynamic compromise
 Cauterization
 Anterior and posterior nasal packing
 Surgical – endoscopic cautery and ligation of vessels
Patient education
 Avoid insertingfingers into the nose, especially children.
 As first aid, explain how to pinch the nose tightly and apply ice pack over the nose, while
waiting for proper medical attention.
References
1. Epistaxis. In: Scott Brown's Otolaryngology, IS MacKay and TR Bull (eds) Vd4, 6th Edition, 1997,
London: Buttcrworths. pp 4/18/1-19.
ALLERGIC RHINITIS
Allergic rhinitis is an IgE mediated type I hypersensitivity reaction of mucus membrane of
nasal cavity sometimes affecting paranasal sinuses due to mucosal continuity.
Salient features
 Sneezing, itching, watery nasal discharge and a feeling of nasal obstruction. It may be
associated with allergic conjunctivitis and bronchial asthma.
 Sneezing, itching watery rhinorrhoea and conjunctivitis are prominent symptoms in seasonal
allergic rhinitis (SAR/Hay fever) while perennial allergic rhinitis (PAR) due to long standing
nasal mucosal congestion with purulent nasal discharge associated with nasal blockage, post
nasal discharge and hyposmia.
Investigations
 Peripheral blood eosinophilia
 Nasal smear – shows eosinophilia
 X ray nose and para nasal sinuses
 Intranasal provocation test
 Specific IgE antibody test
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Avoid allergens.
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. cetrizine 10-20 mg in a single daily dose for 7 days In children 5 mg od or
163

ENT Diseases
 Tab. chlorpheniramine maleate 4 mg 6-8 hourly for 7 days. (Caution: Not recommended
for children under 1 year) Or
 Tab. pheniramine maleate 25-50 mg 8 hourly for 7 days. In children 0.5mg/kg/day
divided in 3 doses. The duration of treatment may need to be extended depending upon
the response of the patient.
 If nasal obstruction and rhinorrhoea, Normal saline nasal drops 1-2 drops in each nostril 2
times daily or xylometazoline 0.1% nasal drops 1-2 drops 2-3 times daily for 5-7 days. In
children 0.05% 1-2 drops 2 times daily. or oxymetazoline 0.5% nasal drops 2-3 drops 2-3
times daily for 5-7 days. In children 0.025% 1-2 drops 2 times in each nostril
 If the signs and symptoms are persistent, Betamethasone/ hydrocortisone nasal drops 2-3
times/ day. Beclomethasone inhaler (50 mcg/puff) 2 puffs 12 hourly or budesonide (50-
100 mcg/puff) 1-2 puffs a day or fluticasone 150 meg/puff 1-2 puffs a day. Or Topical
azelastine intranasal spray 2-3 times a day.
 In case of no response to the above treatment, Tab. prednisolone 5-60 mg/day in 3-4
divided doses for 5-7 days or Tab. dexamethasone 0.5-5.0 mg/day in 3-4 divided doses
for 5-7 days. Or Tab. betamethasone 0.5-5.0 mg/day in 3-4 divided doses for 5-7 days.
Patient education
 This disease is due to hypersensitivity and there is no cure but symptoms can be controlled
effectively by the judicious use of drugs and the patient can lead a normal life.
 Avoid prolong use of topical decongestant nasal drops as it can cause atrophic rhinitis,
anosmia and rhinitis medicamentosa.
 Chlorpheniramine, pheniramine etc. can cause sedation, cognitive impairment. Patient
should avoid tasks requiring alertness and skill. These drugs can also cause dryness of the
mouth and urinary hesitancy.
 Systemic steroids should not be stopped abruptly. Dose to be tapered off before cessation
of therapy.
 Medicated nasal drops should not be used for more than seven days.
References
1. Mechanism and Treatment of Allergic Rhinitis. In: Scott Brown's Otolaryngology. JB Booth (ed), 6th
Edition, 1997. Butterworth’s-Heinemann, pp 4/6/1-16.
COMMON COLD (CORYZA)
It is one of the most common viral infection affecting upper respiratory tract.
Salient features
 Nasal stuffiness, rhinorrhea, sneezing and low grade fever. Nasal obstruction, profuse
mucopurulant secretions
 Sore throat for 1 or 2 days followed by cough and nasal discharge.
164

ENT Diseases
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Steam inhalation 2-3 times/day
 For nasal obstruction, saline nasal drops 1-2drops in each nostril 2-3 times daily
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. chlorpheniramine 4mg 8 hourly for 5-7 days. (in children 0.35mg/kg/day in 3 equal
doses) or Tab. pheniramine 25mg 2-3 times daily for 5-7days ( in children 0.5mg/kg/day
divided in equal doses) or Tab. cetirizine dihydrochloride 10mg once a day 5-7days (in
children 5mg once per day).
 If patient has malaise and fever,
 Tab. paracetamol 1500mg 3-4 times a day for 2-3 days and then as when required (in
children 40-60mg/kg/day divided in 4 doses)
If nasal obstruction is severe,
 Ephedrine 0.75% nasal drop,1-2drops in each nostril 3 times a day for 2-3 days or
oxymetazoline HCL 0.05% nasal drops,1-2drops in each nostril 3 times a day for 2-3
days( in children 0.025% nasal drops,1 drop 2 times daily or xylometazoline 0.1%, 1-
2drops in each nostril 3 times a day for 2-3 days( in children 0.05%, 1-2 drops 2 times
daily) (Caution: Not recommended in children below 6yrs of age, medicated nasal drops
should not used for more than 7 days)
Patient education
 This is a self-limiting viral infection and usually subsides in one week requiring only
symptomatic relief.
 Antibiotics have no role.
 Chlorpheniramine and pheniramine can cause sedation and cognitive impairment,
therefore should be avoided for tasks requiring alertness and skill.
 Medicated nasal drops used for longer periods can cause rebound congestion and rhinitis
medicamentosa.
References
1. Acute Rhinosinusitis. In: Logan Turner's Disease of the Nose, Throat and Ear. 10th Edition, PP 34
FURUNCULOSIS OF NOSE (VESTIBULITS)
Furunculosis is acute infection of hair follicle with Staphylococcus aureus.
Salient features
 Sever pain and tenderness over the tip of nose. There may be headache, malaise and
pyrexia. Examination reveals congestion and swelling of vestibule.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Local application of moist heat will enhance the localization of infection and promote
drainage.
165

ENT Diseases
Pharmacological treatment
 Cap. amoxicillin 500mg 8hrly for 5-7 days (in children 25-50mg /kg/day in 3 divided
dose) or Cap. amoxicillin 250/500mg plus clavulanic acid 125mg 8 hr for 5-7days
 Tab ibuprofen 400-600mg 3 times in a day for 5 days (In children 10mg/kg/dose or Tab
paracetamol 500 mg 6hrly for 2-3days then as and when required till pain and fever
subsides (in children 10mg/kg/dose 6-8hrly).
 Usually improvement in pain, tenderness and inflammation occur within 24-48hr after
imitation of treatment, patient should be monitored regularly. However, if there is flaring
of infection in the form of spreading facial cellulitis then patient should be hospitalized
and shifted to systemic IV antibiotics. If patient is having recurrent furunculosis, then the
patient must be investigated for diabetes mellitus.
Patient education
 Do not fidget with the furuncle as this lies in the dangerous area of the face and cause
serious complications.
 Complete antibiotic therapy to avoid risk of developing antimicrobial resistance
References
1. Disease of external nose and nasal vestibule. In diseases of ear nose and throat, PL Dhingra’s 2ndedition.
ACUTE TONSILLITIS
The common cause is viral infection due to adenovirus and Epstein-Barr virus. Secondary
bacterial infection due to Group A β haemolytic S treptococci, Haemophilus influenza,
Staphylococcus also occurs.
Salient features
 Throat pain, difficulty in swallowing.
 Pyrexia, cervical lymphadenopathy.
 Inflamed tonsils with exudates
Pharmacological treatment
• Tab. paracetamol 500 mg 3-4 times a day for 5 days (children 10 kg/dose) or Tab.
ibuprofen 400 mg-600 mg 3 times a day for 5 days (children 10 mg/kg/dose.)
• Cap.amoxicillin 500mgTDS for 5 days. Or Tab. erythromycin 500mgQIDfor 5-7
CHRONIC TONSILLITIS
Chronic inflammation of tonsil starts as an acute inflammation. Minute abscesses get walled
by chronic inflammation. It can be chronic parenchymatous or hypertrophic type tonsillitis.
166

ENT Diseases
Salient features
 Tonsils are uniformly enlarged and congested. Chronic follicular tonsillitis shows beads of
white discharge on surface of tonsil. Tonsils are small and inflamed, occur in adults,
anterior pillars are congested in chronic fibrotic tonsillitis
Symptoms
 Repeated attacks of sore throat with little remission between attacks
 Odynophagia, fever, cough and irritation in throat. Halitosis –foul breath. Thick speech,
difficulty in breathing, swallowing and snoring
Signs
 Hypertrophied tonsils, congestion of anterior pillar, enlarged non-tender jugulodigastric
nodes
 Extrusion of purulent discharge on pressure over the tonsil with a tongue depressor – Irwin
Moore’s sign
Pharmacological treatment
 Cap. amoxicillin 500mgTDS/ tab. azithromycin 500mgOD for 5-7 days
 Tab. paracetamol 500mg TDS for 5 days
 Bed rest
 Surgery–tonsillectomy for recurrent episodes of tonsillitis
ACUTE PAROTITIS
Known as mumps, caused by paramyxovirus. It usually affects children less than 15 years.
the incubation period –2-3 weeks.
Salient features
 Bilateral parotid swelling, pain over gland, ear pain
 Low-grade fever, arthralgia, malaise, headache
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Supportive measures-bed rest, adequate hydration, antipyretics
 Prevention –Measles Mumps Rubella (MMR) vaccine
BACTERIAL PAROTITIS
Mechanical blockage of salivary duct or due to stasis of salivary secretions coupled with
secondary infection results in bacterial parotitis. It is prevalent in debilitated patients.
Retrograde migration of intra-oral bacteria contributes to development of acute bacterial
parotitis. Sialolithiasis is the cause of acute parotitis in non-debilitated patients.
Salient features
 Pain, swelling, tenderness, indurations of gland. Erythema of skin and oral mucosa, fever.
167

ENT Diseases
Investigations
 Leucocytosis
 Milking of gland for purulent discharge through the duct for culture and sensitivity
 Palpation and X-ray for stone
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Adequate hydration, good oral hygiene
 Warm compression and repeated massage of the gland. Stone in the distal duct –
expressed manually or removed after enlarging the duct orifice with a small incision.
Failure indicates an abscess, which is confirmed by CT scan or USG.
Pharmacological treatment
 Cap. amoxicillin 500mg thrice a day /Tab. amoxicillin with clavulanic acid 625 mg (in
adult)TDS for 7 days.
168