Chapter 11
EYE DISEASES
STYE (EXTERNAL HORDEOLUM)
Stye is an acute suppurative inflammation of glands of Zeis due to staphylococci infection
and is common in young adults and debilitated persons.
Salient features
 Acute pain and tenderness over inflamed Zeis gland, seen as a localised painful and
hard swelling seen near the lid margin. The lid margin is red and oedematous.
 An abscess may form which points near the base of the lash. The pain subsides after
evacuation of the pus.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Dry hot fomentation applied frequently in early stage is useful.
Pharmacological treatment
 Evacuation of the pus by pulling the involved lash or incising the abscess.
 Antibiotic eye drops and ointment-to control and prevent spread of infection
(fluoroquinolones e.g. moxifloxacin 0.5% eye drops 4 to 6 hourlyuntil infection subsides)
 Systemic antibiotics (e.g. Tab.amoxicillin with clavulanic acid 625 mg TDS for 5 days)
 For pain and inflammation e.g. Tab.ibuprofen 400 mg TDS till inflammation subsides.
Patient education
 Maintain ocular hygiene to prevent recurrence.
CHALAZION
A chalazion (meibomian cyst) is a chronic, sterile, granulomatous inflammatory lesion
caused by retained sebaceous secretion leaking from the meibomian or other sebaceous
glands into adjacent stroma. A chalazion secondarily infected is referred as an internal
hordeolum.
Salient features
 A gradually enlarging painless nodule. Very rarely a large upper lid chalazion may press
on the cornea, induce astigmatism and cause blurred vision. A ‘marginal’ chalazion is
similar except that it involves a gland of Zeis and is therefore located not in the tarsal
plate but on the anterior lid margin.
 Patients with meibomian gland disease or rosacea are at increased risk of chalazion
formation which may be multiple and/or recurrent.
169

Eye Diseases
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Treatment may not be required because at least a third of chalazia resolve spontaneously
and an internal hordeolum may discharge and disappear. Persistent lesions may be treated
as follows:
 Dry hot fomentation applied frequently in early stage is useful.
Pharmacological treatment
 Steroid injection into the lesion is preferable if close to the lacrimal punctum because of the
risk of surgical damage.
- Between 0.2 and 2 ml of 5 mg/mLtriamcinolone diacetate aqueous suspension diluted with
lidocaine (or equivalent) to a concentration of 5 mg/mL is injected through the
conjunctiva into the tissue around the lesion with a 30-gauge needle.
- The success rate following one injection is about 80%. In unresponsive cases a second
injection can be given 2 weeks later.
 Cap. doxycycline (100 mg BD for 7 days) may be required as prophylaxis in patients with
recurrent chalazia, particularly if associated with acne rosacea.
 Incision and curettage, in case of large chalazia, if present for more than 3 – 4 months or
if cosmetically unacceptable.
Patient education
 Recurrence may occur; common causes are uncorrected refractive error, blepharitis and
diabetes.
VIRAL CONJUNCTIVITIS
Salient features
 Common symptoms include itching, foreign body sensation, watering of eyes. It can also
present as pharyngoconjunctival fever and acute haemorrhagic conjunctivitis.
 Frequently a history of recent upper respiratory tract infection or contact with a patient. It
often starts in one eye and involves the fellow eye a few days later.
 On examination, inferior palpebral conjunctival follicles and pinpoint subconjunctival
haemorrhages are observed. The common organism responsible is Adenovirus.
 Conjunctival cultures/swabs are not needed unless the discharge is excessive or the
condition becomes chronic.
Non-pharmacological treatment
Self-limiting condition that typically gets worse for the first 4 to 7 days after onset and may
not resolve for 2 to 3 weeks or longer if there is corneal involvement. It is highly contagious,
usually for 10 to 12 days from onset as long as the eyes are red (when not on steroids).
 Use dark goggles and avoid close contact with other persons for two weeks.
 Restrict work and school for patients with significant exposure to others.
 Frequent handwashing and cool compresses several times per day.
170

Eye Diseases
Pharmacological treatment
 Preservative-free artificial tears (carboxy methyl cellulose 0.5% eye drops) four to eight
times per day for 1 to 3 weeks. Use single-use vials to limit tip contamination and spread
of disease.
 Antihistamine (e.g., epinastine 0.05% BD) if itching is severe. Anti-inflammatory drops
likeketorolac 0.5% may also be used if needed.
 If a membrane / pseudomembrane are present, use a steroid in form of drops with or
without ointment (e.g. loteprednol 0.5% QID, flurometholone 0.1% ointment QID or
dexamethasone 0.3% ointment QID). Steroid treatment is maintained depending upon the
response and then slowly tapered.
 Routine / unsupervised use of topical antibiotics or steroids should be discouraged.
Patient education
 Patients should avoid touching their eyes, shaking hands, sharing handkerchiefs, towels
with family members.
 Patient’s drops or ointment must not be used by other members of the family.
ALLERGIC CONJUNCTIVITIS
It occurs as a result of hypersensitivity reaction due exposure to allergicsubstances.
Salient features
 The patient present with marked itching and watery discharge. History of allergy is
usually present.
 On examination, conjunctival papillae and edema over eyelids is seen.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Cool compresses several times per day and avoid offending agents.
Pharmacological treatment
 Topical anti-inflammatory and anti-histaminic drops, depending on the severity
(olopatadine 0.1% OD/BD, nedocromil 2% TDS, or ketotifen 0.025% BD, ketorolac
0.5% QID).
 In severe cases, mild topical steroid (e.g., loteprednol 0.2% or fluorometholone 0.1%,
QID for 1 to 2 weeks) may have to be added. Steroids are gradually tapered as patient
responds to medications.
 Preservative free artificial tears four to eight times per day.
 Investigate for offending agents and avoidance of the same.
 Oral antihistamine (e.g., diphenhydramine 25 mg TDS/QID. or cetrizine/
levocetrizine/montelukast/loratadine 10 mg OD) can be helpful in severe cases and in
cases with associated systemic allergy.
171

Eye Diseases
VERNAL / ATOPIC CONJUNCTIVITIS
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis (VKC) is a recurrent bilateral disorder in which both IgE- and
cell-mediated immune mechanisms play important roles. It primarily affects boys and onset is
generally from about the age of 5 years onwards (mean age 7 years).
Salient features
 Common symptoms include marked itching, thick ropy discharge and seasonal
occurrence (during spring/summer)
 History of atopy may be present. Usually seen in young patients, especially boys.
 Large conjunctival papillae seen under the upper eyelid or along the limbus (limbal
vernal). Often they are so large as to give a cobble stone appearance.
 Superior corneal “shield” ulcer (a well-delineated, sterile, gray–white infiltrate) maybe
seen in some cases.
Treatment
 Treat as for allergic conjunctivitis.
 Mast cell stabilizer (e.g. sodium chromoglycate QID) or a dual action mast cell stabilizer
and antihistamine (e.g., olopatadine 0.1% OD/BD) or ketotifen 0.025%, or azelastine
0.05% for 2 to 3 weeks, prophylactically, before the season starts).
 If a shield ulcer is present, add topical steroid (e.g., loteprednol 0.5% or flurometholone
0.1%, prednisolone 1%, etc) four to six times per day. Taper steroids over 4 week as
condition of patient improves. Shield ulcers may need to be scraped to remove superficial
plaque-like material before re-epithelialization will occur.
 Topical antibiotic (e.g., moxifloxacin 0.3% eye drop, tobramycin 1% QID) is given if
associated infection is there or steroids are prescribed
 Cycloplegic agent (e.g., cyclopentolate 1% BD drops or atropine 1% TDS in form of
drops or ointment) if cornea is involved, when there is much pain due to ciliary spasm.
 Consider cyclosporine 0.05% BD if not responding to the preceding treatment. Maximal
effect may not be seen for several weeks.
 Follow-up should be done every 1 to 3 days in the presence of a shield ulcer; otherwise,
every few weeks. Steroids are tapered slowly as improvement is noted.
 Anti-allergy drops are maintained for the duration of the season and are often reinitiate a
few weeks before the next spring.
 Patients on topical steroids should be monitored regularly, including IOP monitoring,
even if used only on the skin.
 Patients and relatives of children should be strictly instructed not to use or continue
steroids, in any form, without medical advice
Patient education
 Avoid exposure to substances causing atopy. Maintain hygiene to prevent secondary
infection.
172

Eye Diseases
BACTERIAL CONJUNCTIVITIS (NON-GONOCOCCAL)
Acute bacterial conjunctivitis is a common and usually self-limiting condition caused by
direct eye contact with infected secretions. The most common isolates are S. pneumoniae,
S.aureus, H. influenzae and Moraxella catarrhalis.
Salient features
 The patient complains of redness, foreign body sensation, mucoid or mucopurulent
discharge. Itching is much less prominent.
 On examination, purulent discharge, conjunctival papillae and chemosis are seen.
 If severe or recurrent, conjunctival swab for routine cultures and sensitivities and
immediate Gram stain to evaluate for gonococcus.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Patients should avoid touching their eyes, shaking hands, sharing handkerchiefs, towels,
etc.
 Restrict work and school for patients with significant exposure to others.
 Frequent hand washing.
Pharmacological treatment
 Use topical antibiotic therapy [moxifloxacin 0.5% drops QID or more frequent in severe
cases] for 5 to 7 days.
 H. influenzae conjunctivitis should be treated with oral amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (20 to
40 mg/kg/day in three divided doses) because of occasional extra ocular involvement
(e.g., otitis media, pneumonia, and meningitis). Antibiotic therapy is adjusted according
to culture and sensitivity results.
 If associated with dacryocystitis, systemic antibiotics are necessary.
Patienteducation
 Follow up every 2 to 3 days initially, then every 5 to 7 days until resolved.
 Maintain ocular hygiene
GONOCOCCAL CONJUNCTIVITIS
Salient features
 Clinical symptoms start within 12 to 24 hours and include severe purulent discharge,
swelling of eyelids
 On examination, conjunctival papillae, marked chemosis and preauricular adenopathy is
observed. Examination of entire cornea for peripheral ulcers (especially superiorly) should
be done because of the risk for rapid perforation.
 Conjunctival scrapings for immediate Gram stain and for culture and sensitivities (e.g.,
blood agar and chocolate agar) should be taken.
Pharmacological treatment
173

Eye Diseases
Initiated if the Gram stain shows gram negative intracellular diplococci or there is a high
suspicion clinically of gonococcal conjunctivitis.
 Inj. ceftriaxone 1 g intramuscularly in a single dose.
 If corneal involvement exists, or cannot be excluded because of chemosis and eyelid
swelling, hospitalize the patient and treat with Inj. ceftriaxone 1 g intravenously every 12
to 24 hours.
 In penicillin-allergic patients, consider an oral fluoroquinolone (e.g., Tab. ciprofloxacin
500 mg, for 5 days) or a single oral dose of Tab. azithromycin 1 g.
 Topical ciprofloxacin ointment QID or fluoroquinolone drops every two hours (e.g.,
gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin, or ciprofloxacin).
 Saline irrigation QID until the discharge resolves.
 Treat for possible chlamydial co-infection (e.g., Tab. azithromycin 1 g single dose or Tab.
doxycycline 100 mg BD for 7 days).
 Treat sexual partners with oral antibiotics for both gonorrhea and chlamydia as described
previously.
Patient education
 The patient should be followed daily until consistent improvement is noted, and then
every 2 to 3 days until the condition resolves.
 The patient and sexual partners should be evaluated by their medical doctors for other
sexually transmitted diseases.
TRACHOMA
Trachoma is an infectious disease caused by the Chlamydia trachomatis type A, type B, type
C bacterium which produces a characteristic rougheningof the inner surface of the eyelids. It
is also called granular conjunctivitis andEgyptian ophthalmia and is the leading cause of
infectious blindness in the world.
Salient features
 Complaints of mild itching and irritation of the eyes and eyelids, purulent or mucoid
discharge from the eyes, photophobia, blurred vision and eye pain are common.
 Diseases progresses slowly, and the more painful symptoms may not emerge until
adulthood.
 Presence of at least two of the following signs: superior tarsal follicles, limbal follicles
(Herbert’s pit), typical conjunctival scarring and vascular pannus.
 Transmission of the disease occurs vial ocular and nasal secretions (direct spread, indirect
via fomites, coughing/sneezing).
Grading of severity
174

Eye Diseases
MacCallan Classification
 Stage 1: Superior tarsal follicles, mild superior SPK, and pannus, often proceeded by
purulent discharge and tender preauricular nodes.
 Stage 2: Florid superior tarsal follicular reaction (2a) or papillary hypertrophy (2b)
associated with superior corneal SEIs, pannus, and limbal follicles.
 Stage 3: Follicles and scarring of superior tarsal conjunctiva.
 Stage 4: No follicles, extensive conjunctival scarring.
 Late complications: Severe dry eyes, trichiasis, entropion, keratitis, corneal scarring,
superficial fibrovascular pannus, Herbert pits (scarred limbal follicles), corneal bacterial
superinfection, and ulceration.
World Health Organization (WHO) Classification
 TF(Trachomatous inflammation: follicular): More than five follicles on the upper tarsus.
 TI (Trachomatous inflammation: intense): Inflammation with thickening obscuring more
than 50% of the tarsal vessels.
 TS (Trachomatous scarring): Cicatrization of tarsal conjunctiva with fibrous white bands.
 TT (Trachomatous trichiasis): Trichiasis of at least one eyelash.
 CO (Corneal opacity): Corneal opacity involving at least part of the pupillary margin.
Treatment
The SAFE strategy for trachoma management supported by the WHO and other agencies
encompasses
S Surgery for trichiasis,
A Antibiotics for active disease,
F Facial hygiene and
E Environmental improvement
 Antibiotics should be administered to those affected and to all family members. Single
antibiotic course is not always effective in eliminating infection in an individual, and
communities may need to receive annual treatment to suppress infection.
- A single dose of azithromycin (20 mg/kg up to 1g) is the treatment of choice.
- Topical 1% tetracycline ointment is less effective than oral treatment; it should be given
for 6 weeks.
 Facial cleanliness is a critical preventative measure.
 Environmental improvement such as access to adequate water and sanitation, as well as
control of flies, is important.
 Surgeryis aimed at relieving entropion and trichiasis and maintaining complete lid closure
with bilamellar tarsal rotation.
CORNEAL ULCER
175

Eye Diseases
Defect in the integrity of corneal epithelium along with infiltration of underlying stroma is
defined as corneal ulcer. It can be due to direct corneal trauma, chronic eyelid disease, tear
film abnormalities, hypoxic trauma from contact lens wear, and deficient nutrition as in
keratomalacia or neuroparalytic keratitis (Bell's palsy).It is classified as;
1. Infective keratitis may be bacterial, fungal or viral.
2. Non infective like traumatic (chemical/thermal/radiation), neoplastic or immune mediated
BACTERIAL KERATITIS
Salient features
 Source of infection can be exogenous or endogenous (from other ocular structures)
 Patient presents with history of trauma to the eye with pain and redness. Concomitant
photophobia, discharge and dimness of vision can also be present.
 On examination, conjunctival and circumcorneal vessels may be engorged and inflamed
with localized epithelium disintegrated and cast off. Ulcer is saucer shaped, walls project
above the normal corneal surface. Surrounding area shows grey discoloration (cloudiness)
suggestive of the progressive stage of the ulcer-microscopic tissue examination reveals
leucocytic infiltration.In severe cases there is pronounced anterior chamber reaction, often
with hypopyon.
Investigations
 Conjunctival swab and ulcer scrapings can be tested with Gram stain, KOH preparation
and culture to determine the etiology.
 Routine investigations like complete blood count, blood sugar, urine examination should
be done. Septic foci should be found.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Maintain proper ocular hygiene by cleaning discharge twice a day.
 Removal of contributory factors like trichiasis, foreign body etc.
 The eye can be covered with a pad, unless the discharge is copious. In such case, shield
the eye with dark goggles.
 Prevention and treatment of complications –secondary glaucoma
Pharmacological treatment
 Control of infection with antibiotics-Start with empirical broad spectrum antibiotics,
which can be changed according to sensitivity report (Table 1).
Table 1. Indication and doses of antibacterials in treatment of bacterial corneal ulcer
Name Special Dose
Indication Systemic Subconjunctival Topical
Gentamicin Gm -ve org. and 3-5 mg/kg/day I/V or 20 mg 0.3% drops and
Staph. species I/M in divided doses ointment
176

Eye Diseases
8 hourly
Tobramycin Same as Same as gentamycin 5-20 mg 0.3% drops
gentamicin
Cefazolin Gm +ve cocci 25-50 mg/kg/day IV 100 mg 5% concentration
and Gm -ve rods or IM divided doses used as topical drops
8hrly
Ceftazidime Gm -ve specially 1-2 gm IV 8-12 100 mg
Pseudomonas hourly
CiprofloxacinBroad spectrum 500 mg orally 12 0.3% drops and
including most hourly, 200 mg IV ointment
aerobic Gm-ve 12 hourly
org.,S. aureus
andS.
epidermidis
Ofloxacin Broad spectrum 200-800 mg/day 0.3% drops
orally 200 mg I/V 12
hourly
Norfloxacin Gm +ve and Gm 400 mg orally 12 0.3% drops
-ve org. includinghourly
Pseudomonas.
Not effective
against anaerobes
LomefloxacinGood coverage of400 mg orally or IV Initially 5 drops in
Gm -ve. Less 12 hourly 20min or 1 drop
potent against every hour for 6/10
Gm +ve hours. Then 1 drop
2-3 times a day.
Sparfloxacin Broad spectrum. 400 mg orally on 0.3% drops
Gm +ve and Gm day 1, followed by
-ve org. including200 mg once a day
anaerobes
Gm +ve org.
(except 500 mg orally 6
penicillinase hourly, 3-6 g/day IV
Ampicillin 50-100 mg
producingStaph.)or IM divided doses
and some Gm -ve 6 hourly
org.
Cloxacillin Penicillinase 250-500 mg orally, 6
177

Eye Diseases
producingStaph. hourly
Gm +ve cocci 500 mg orally 6
Cephalexin
and Gm -ve rods hourly
 Use atropine 1% eye drops or ointment for controlling iridocyclitis, to relieve ciliary
spasm and to prevent synechia formation.
 Other measures like scraping and cauterization. If the ulcer progresses in spite of the
pharmacological treatment, the removal of the necrotic material may be hastened by
scraping or ulcer may be cauterized with 100% carbolic acid, 10% trichloracetic acid 10%
or 5% povidone iodine.
 In case of non resolving ulcers, surgical methods like vasculoplasty, conjuctival hooding
and patch graft, tectonic penetrating keratoplasty and tarsorraphy can be considered.
Patient education
 Use dark goggles and avoid close contact with other persons for two weeks.
 Restrict work and school for patients with significant exposure to others.
 Frequent handwashing
FUNGAL KERATITIS
Salient features
 Common organisms are aspergillus, penicillium, fusarium and candida. Risk factors are
leukemia and diabetes, pre existing corneal disease like dry eye, vegetative injury and long
term treatment with antibiotic and steroids.
 On examination, definite white ring in the mid periphery of the cornea with healthy cornea
between the ring and ulcer margin is seen (Immune ring-diagnostic of fungal infection)
 Presence of hypopyon is the rule. Higher the hypopyon more ominous the sign and chances
of perforation.
Non -pharmacological treatment
 Use dark goggles and avoid close contact with other persons for two weeks.
 Restrict work and school for patients with significant exposure to others.
 Frequent handwashing
Pharmacological treatment
- Treatment should be instituted promptly with topical antifungal drops, initially every hour
during the day tapered to 4 hrly interval for 3-4 days, then reduced to 4 times a day for at
least 14-21 days or till there is resolution of active stage (Table 2).
- Subconjunctival injections also may be used in cases of severe keratitis, or when poor
compliance exists.
- An oral antifungal (eg, ketoconazole, fluconazole 100mg) should be considered for cases
of deep stromal infection.
178

Eye Diseases
- Fluconazole has been shown to penetrate better into the cornea after systemic
administration compared to other azoles and is associated with fewer adverse effects.
Table 2. Doses of antifungal drugs used in the treatment of fungal infections
Drugs Topical Sub conjunctival/oral Intravitreal
Amphotericin –B 1-10mg/ml drops 0.37mg sc 5-10µg
Natamycin 5% drops 25µg
1% drops
Miconazole
2% oint
Ketokonazole 1% 200-800mg oral/day 0.5mg
Fluconazole 0.2%-2% 100-200mg 6 hourly 0.1mg
Intra-cameral
 Inj. amphotericin-B(5- 7.5% µg in 0.1ml in 5% dextrose)
Intra-corneal
 Inj. amphotericin-B (5µg in 0.1ml) four to five places around the lesion intrastromaly, not
in thin area
 Inj. voriconazole (50 µg in 0.1% in RL solution)
Systemic antifungal
Oral fluconazole and ketoconazole are absorbed systemically with good levels in the anterior
chamber and cornea - therefore they should be considered in the management of deep fungal
keratitis fungal abscess, endothelial plaque.
 Cycloplegics are mandatory and antiglaucoma drugs may be added to the treatment
depending on the intraocular pressure etc.
 Frequent corneal debridement with a spatula is helpful. It debulks fungal organisms and
epithelium, and enhances penetration of the topical antifungal agent
 Surgery is considered in those patients who fail to respond to medical treatment and may
result in corneal perforation. The treatment of choice is therapeutic penetrating
keratoplasty.
VIRAL KERATITS
Common viruses that cause corneal disease are Herpes simplex virus (HSV), Varicella zoster,
Epstein Barr and Adenovirus. Cytomegalovirus can also cause keratitis and is more
commonly associated with AIDS.
HERPES SIMPLEX KERATITIS
Salient features
179

Eye Diseases
 Herpes simplex keratitis occurs in two forms –primary and recurrent
 Primary infection of any of the 3 branches (ophthalmic, maxillary, mandibular) of cranial
nerve V leads to latent infection of nerve cells in trigeminal ganglion.
 Interneuronal spread of HSV within ganglion allows patients to develop ocular disease
without ever having had primary ocular HSV infection
 Recurrent infection has been thought of as reactivation of virus in the sensory ganglion.
 The disease manifests as vesicular blepharoconjunctivitis occasionally with corneal
involvement as punctate keratitis.
 The patient presents with irritation, photophobia, reduction in vision (when central cornea is
affected) and corneal anaesthesia.
 Corneal ulceration and scarring can occasionally be the only sign of recurrent herpetic
infections. Typical branching, linear pattern with feathery edges and terminal bulbs at ends
are visualized by fluorescein staining.
Pharmacological treatment
 Antiviral drugs
- Trifluridine and acyclovir are much more effective in epithelial disease than others.
- Idoxuridine and trifluridine are frequently associated with toxic reactions.
Table 3. Antiviral drugs used in the treatment of viral keratitis
Drug Strength Frequency
Trifluridine 1% solution Every 2 hours while awake
Acyclovir 3% ointment 5 times daily
Idoxuridine 0.1% solution Hourly while awake
Vidarabine 3% ointment 5 times daily
- Oral acyclovir may be useful in treatment of severe herpetic eye disease particularly in
atopic individuals.
- For active treatment 400 mg five times daily in non immunocompromised patients.
- 800 mg five times daily in compromised and atopic patients.
- Prophylactic dosage in recurrent disease is 400 mg twice daily.
- Famciclovir or valacyclovir may also be used.
 Topical corticosteroids accelerate corneal thinning, increasing risk of corneal perforation
 Epithelial debridement is an effective way to treat dendritic keratitis before acyclovir.
Infected epithelium is easy to remove with tightly wound cotton tip applicator.
Adjunctive therapy with topical antiviral accelerates epithelial healing
 Surgical management like penetrating keratoplasty is indicated for visual rehabilitation in
patients with severe corneal scarring. It should not be undertaken until herpetic disease
has been inactive for many months.
GLAUCOMA
180

Eye Diseases
The classical triad of increased intraocular pressure (IOP), optic nerve head cupping and
visual field changes are always present and are signs of progress of the disease and bench
mark for assessing response to therapy.
PRIMARY OPEN ANGLE GLAUCOMA
In open angle glaucoma the structure of the trabecular meshwork appears normal but offers
an increased resistance to the outflow of aqueous which results in an elevated ocular pressure.
Salient features
 The disease is insidious and usually asymptomatic, until it has caused a significant loss
of visual field. Patients may experience mild headache, eye ache and visual field defect
in late cases.
 Reading and close work often present increasing difficulties owing to accommodative
failure due to constant pressure on the ciliary muscle and its nerve supply. Therefore,
patients usually complain of frequent changes in presbyopic glasses.
 Ocular examination including slit-lamp biomicroscopy may reveal normal anterior
segment. In late stages pupil reflex becomes sluggish and cornea may show slight haze.
 In the initial stages the IOP may not be raised permanently, but there is an exaggeration
of the normal diurnal variation. Therefore, repeated observations of IOP (every 3-4hour),
for 24 hours is required during this stage (Diurnal variation test). Applanation tonometry
should be preferred over Schiotz tonometry.
 Gonioscopy reveals open angles. Optic disc changes are typically progressive,
asymmetric and present a variety of characteristic clinical patterns. It is essential,
therefore, to record the appearance of the nerve head in such a way that will accurately
reveal subtle glaucomatous changes over the course of follow-up period.
Investigations
 Perimetryto detect the visual field defects.
 Nerve fibre layer analysis and disc topography analysis to detect early damage and for
progression analysis.
Pharmacological treatment
 Identification of target pressure. From the baseline evaluation data a ‘target pressure’
should be identified for each patient. Progression of disease is uncommon if IOP is
maintained at less than 16 to 18 mm of Hg in patients having mild to moderate damage
and 10 to 12 mmHg in patients with severe damage.
 Single drug therapy. One topical antiglaucoma drug should be chosen after due
consideration to the patient’s personal and medical factors. If the initial drug chosen is
ineffective or intolerable, it should be replaced by the drug of second choice.
181

Eye Diseases
 Combination therapy. If one drug is not sufficient to control IOP then a combination
therapy with two or more drugs should be tried.
 Monitoring of therapy by disc changes, field changes and tonometry is most essential on
regular follow-up. In the event of progression of glaucomatous damage, the target
pressure should be reset at a lower level and any risk factors should be evaluated (Table
4).
Table 4. Drugs used for treatment of glaucoma
Topical agent Side effects
Beta-blockers Exacerbate asthma and chronic airway disease,
(timolol 0.5%, levobunolol 0.5%, hypotension, bradycardia
betaxolol 0.5%-selective)
Parasympathomimetic Visual blurring in young patients, in patient with
(pilocarpine 2%) cataracts, headache due to ciliary spasm
Sympathomimetic (adrenaline Redness, headache, mydriasis
0.5%, dipivefrine 0.1%)
Alpha-2 agonist (brimonidine Redness, headache, drowsiness, allergic reaction
0.2%)
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors Stinging, bitter test
(Systemic –acetazolamide, topical
–dorzolamide 2%, brinzolamide
1%)
Prostaglandin analogues Redness, aggravation of inflammation, increased
(latanoprost 0.005%, bimatoprost pigmentation of iris and peri ocular skin, lengthening of
0.3%, travoprost 0.004% ) cilia, rarely macular edema.
Hyper osmotic agents 1-1.5g/kg Mannitol contraindicated in hypertensives and in patient
glycerol, mannitol 1-2g/kg with pulmonary edema. Glycerol not to be given in
diabetics
Lasertreatment
Argon laser trabeculoplasty (ALT) or selective laser trabeculoplasty (SLT) are indicated in
patients intolerant to topical medication, failure of medical therapy or non compliance to
treatment. Since IOP reduction with laser is seldom greater than 30%, an IOP higher than 28
mmHg is unlikely to be adequately controlled by laser alone.
Surgical treatment
 Uncontrolled glaucoma despite maximal medical therapy and laser trabeculoplasty.
 Non-compliance of medical therapy and
 Intolerance to medical therapy
 Eyes with advanced disease i.e., having very high IOP, advanced cupping and advanced
field loss should be treated with filtration surgery as a primary line of management.
182

Eye Diseases
 Types of surgeries-trabeculectomy, shunt & valve surgeries, non penetrating glaucoma
Patient education
 Treatment of glaucoma whether medical or surgical is aimed to decrease further damage
to optic nerve. Once damage has occurred, it is irreversible
PRIMARY ANGLE-CLOSURE GLAUCOMA
The term ‘angle-closure’ refers to occlusion of the trabecular meshwork by the peripheral iris,
obstructing aqueous outflow.
I. ACUTE ANGLE CLOSURE GLAUCOMA
Salient features
 Patient presents acutely (congestive glaucoma) with coloured halos around lights due to
corneal oedema, ocular pain and headache.
 The IOP rise maybe often be so severe as to cause nausea and vomiting and mimic a case of
acute abdomen.
 Precipitating factors include watching television or movie in a darken room, reading,
pharmacological mydriasis or miosis, acute emotional stress and rarely systemic medications
like parasympathetic antagonists or sympathetic agonists (e.g. inhalers, motion sickness
patches and cold remedies) and topiramate.
 On examination, IOP is usually very high (> 40 - 50 mmHg) with conjunctival hyperaemia,
corneal edema, unreactive mid dilated vertically oval pupil.
 Fellow eye generally shows an occludable angle.
Pharmacological treatment
Treatment intensity should be individualized dependent on severity. Hospital admission is
usually required in an acute presentation.
 The patient should assume a supine position to encourage the lens to shift posteriorly
under the influence of gravity.
 Inj. mannitol 20% 1–2 g/kg intravenously over half hour or glycerol 50% 1 g/kg orally,
having checked for contraindications.
 Pilocarpine 2–4% one drop to the affected eye, repeated after half an hour, and one drop
of 1% as prophylaxis into the fellow eye. Some practitioners prefer to omit pilocarpine in
an acutely presenting eye with very high IOP until a significant IOP fall has taken place,
as the associated ischaemia will compromise the action of pilocarpine on the pupillary
sphincter and it may also aggravate the pupillary block.
 An additional oral dose of Tab. acetazolamide 500 mg may be given.
 Topical timolol 0.5%, prednisolone 1% or dexamethasone 0.1% to the affected eye,
leaving 5 minutes between each instillation.
 Analgesia and an antiemetic may often be required.
Subsequent medical treatment
183

Eye Diseases
 Pilocarpine 2% QID to the affected eye and 1% QIDto the fellow eye.
 Topical steroid (prednisolone 1% or dexamethasone 0.1% QID) if the eye is acutely
inflamed.
 Any or all of the following should be continued as necessary according to response:
timolol 0.5% BDand oral acetazolamide 250 mg QIDmay be required.
Surgical treatment
 Definitive treatment is laser iridotomy or iridoplasty after corneal oedema clears. Topical
steroids and any necessary hypotensives can be continued for at least a week. Surgical
options in resistant cases include surgical peripheral iridectomy, lens extraction,
goniosynechialysis andtrabeculectomy.
Patient education
 Do not ignore headache or chronic ache in the eyes and report to the ophthalmologist if
coloured halos around light appear.
II. CHRONIC ACUTE ANGLE CLOSURE GLAUCOMA
Salient features
 Many patients with angle-closure maybe asymptomatic, including those with intermittently
or chronically elevated IOP.
 They may have intermittent milder symptoms of blurring (‘smoke-filled room’)
unassociated with pain.
Pharmacological treatment
 Timolol 0.5% or betaxolol0.5% eye drops twice a day usually required lifelong.
Surgical treatment
 Laser or surgical iridotomy is done to eliminate any element of pupillary block in
affected as well as fellow eye.
III. LENS INDUCED GLAUCOMA
Lens induced glaucoma is classified into phacolytic, phacomorphic, phacoanaphylactic
glaucoma, lens particle glaucoma and glaucoma due to dislocated lens. In addition to
medically lowering the IOP, the cataractous lens needs to be removed, under steroid cover to
suppress the inflammatory element.
ANTERIOR UVEITIS
It is the inflammation of the uveal tract i.e. iris, ciliary body and choroid. Inflammation of iris
and ciliary body constitutes iridocyclitis and anterior uveitis.
Salient features
184

Eye Diseases
 Symptoms of acute uveitis include pain, redness, photophobia, consensual photophobia
(pain in the affected eye when a light is shown in the fellow eye), excessive tearing and
decreased vision.
 Symptoms of chronic uveitis include decreased vision (from vitreous debris, cystoid
macular edema (CME), or cataract, periods of exacerbations and remissions with few
acute symptoms [e.g. juvenile idiopathic (rheumatoid) arthritis].
 Cells and flare in the anterior chamber, ciliary flush and keratic precipitates (KP) are
observed by slit lamp microscopy.
 Complete ocular examination, including an IOP check and a dilated fundus examination.
The vitreous should be evaluated for cells.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Wear dark glasses
Pharmacological treatment
 Cycloplegic e.g., cyclopentolate 1% eye drops BD for mild to moderate inflammation;
atropine ointment 1% TDS for severe inflammation.
 Topical steroid like prednisolone acetate 1% one drop 1 to 6 hourly, depending on the
severity. Most cases of moderate to severe acute uveitis require 1 to 2 hourly dosing
initially. Consider FML(flurometholone) 1% ophthalmic ointment at night.
 If the anterior uveitis is severe and is not responding to topical steroids, then consider
periocular repository steroids (e.g., triamcinolone 20 to 40 mgsubtenon injection).
 If there is no improvement on maximal topical and repository steroids, or if the uveitis is
bilateral and severe, consider systemic steroids (Tab. prednisolone 1mg/kg), or
immunosuppressive therapy.
 Treat secondary glaucoma with beta blockers, not with pilocarpine or prostaglandin
analogues.
 If an exact etiology for the anterior uveitis is determined (herpes, tuberculosis, ankylosing
spondylitis etc.), then appropriate systemic management is required.
 Follow-up is done every 1 to 7 days in the acute phase, depending on the severity and
every 1 to 6 months when stable. At each visit, the anterior chamber reaction and IOP
should be evaluated.
 If the anterior chamber reaction is improving, then the steroid drops can be slowly tapered
[usually one drop per day every 3 to 7 days (e.g., QID for 1 week, then TDS for 1 week,
then BDfor 1 week)].
Patient education
 Recurrent nature of the disease which may interfere with vision should be explained and
possible complications like cataract and glaucoma should be mentioned.
 Possible side effects of long term topical, periocular and systemic corticosteroid therapy
should be explained.
185

Eye Diseases
ORBITAL CELLULITIS
Orbital cellulitis refers to an acute infection of the soft tissues of the orbit behind the orbital
septum. The infection can be exogenous (trauma, foreign body), endogenous (septicemia) or
extension of infection from neighbouring structures (paranasal sinuses, teeth, face, eyelids).
Salient features
 Common causes include Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus
pyogenes and Haemophilus influenzae.
 Symptoms include swelling of eyelids, severe pain which is increased by movements of eye
or pressure and fever, nausea, vomiting and sometimes loss of vision.
 A marked swelling of lids with chemosis of conjunctiva is observed. Restriction of ocular
movements is also seen.
 Fundus examination may show congestion of retinal veins and signs of papillitis or
papilloedema
 Bacterial cultures should be performed from nasal and conjunctival swabs and blood
samples, X-ray to identify associated sinusitis and orbital ultrasonography to detect intra-
orbital abscess should be done.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Warm compresses
Pharmacological treatment
 Intensive antibiotic therapy:
- After obtaining nasal, conjunctival and blood culture samples, intravenous higher broad
spectrum antibiotics should be administered.
- Tab.amoxicillin and clavulanic acid 625mg TDS should be given OR
- Inj. cefotaxime 1-2 gm every 12 hours in adults and 100-150 mg/kg in 2 to 3 divided
doses in children are given. Antibacterials are changed according to the culture sensitivity
reports and continued till resolution of symptoms.
- Ciprofloxacin or vancomycin may be used an alternative.
 Analgesic and anti-inflammatory drugs are helpful in controlling pain and fever.
 Surgical intervention is needed when the patient is unresponsive to antibacterials,
decrease in vision and presence of an orbital or subperiosteal abscess.
Patient education
 Any ear, sinus or dental infection especially in children should be treated promptly
 Any patient presenting with unexplained lid edema or cellulitis should be immediately
referred to an ophthalmologist.
ENDOPHTHALMITIS
186

Eye Diseases
It is an inflammation of the internal coats of the eye along with inflammatory conditions of
intraocular cavities, aqueous and vitreous humour, retina and uvea. Endophthalmitis can be
endogenous (due to hematogenous spread of infective agents) and exogenous (direct
inoculation of infecting agents through breach in continuity of ocular coats e.g. post
traumatic).
Salient features
 Etiological agents include Staphylococcus aureus, coagulase negative Staphylococci,
Streptococci, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Hemophilus influenza and fungus like Candida,
Aspergillus, Histoplasma etc.
 History of eye surgery, penetrating injury, fever, infection or predisposing systemic diseases
leading to metastatic endophthalmitis.
 Symptoms include visual loss, pain, discharge, photophobia, lid swelling. Signs include
conjunctival congestion, hypopyon, vitrous exudates and loss of red fundus reflex.
 Smear of aqueous humour, vitreous humour can be taken for smear and culture testing.
Antibiotic susceptibility testing can also be done.
Pharmacological treatment
 Post operative endophthalmitis
- Intravitreal injection of antibiotics - Inj. vancomycin hydrochloride 1 mg in 0.1 ml plus
Inj. ceftazidime 2 mg in 0.1 ml or Inj. amikacin sulfate 0.4 mg in 0.1 ml.
- Subconjunctival Inj. vancomycin 25 mg/0.5 ml plus Inj. ceftazidime 100 mg/0.5 ml plus
dexamethasone 0.25 mg/0.5 ml.
- Vancomycin eye drops 50 mg/ml plus amikacin eye drops 15 mg/ml 1 drop every 6
hours.
- Homatropine 2% eye drops 3 times a day or atropine 1% eye ointment 2 times a day.
- Prednisolone acetate 1% eye drops or dexamethasone or betamethasone 0.1% eye drops
every 6 hours.
- Tab. prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day in a single morning dose after 24 hours of antibiotic use
and continue for 10-14 days 2 times a day for 5-10 days.
- Parenteral antibiotics are of questionable value and given only as a supportive therapy.
Surgical treatment
Pars plana vitrectomy is indicated if visual acuity is limited to light perception or if there is
poor response to above treatment in 30-36 hours.
 Traumatic endophthalmitis
- Hospitalize the patient and give immunization for tetanus.
- Inj. vancomycin 1 g IV infused over 1 hour, 12 hourly.
- Inj. gentamicin 2 mg/kg every 12 hour or Inj. ceftazidime 2 g IV every 12 hour or inj.
ceftriaxone 2 g IV/day.
- Topical fortified eye drops, subconjunctival injection and intravitreal injection
and cycloplegic drops as in cases of postoperative bacterial endophthalmitis.
187

Eye Diseases
 Surgery
- Repair the ruptured eyeball at the earliest.
- Pars plana vitrectomy - indications are similar to that of postoperative bacterial
endophthalmitis.
 Treatment for fungal endophthalmitis
Exogenous fungal infections may occur postoperatively or secondary to trauma.
Endogenous bacterial endophthalmitis should be treated as an emergency treatment.
- Vitrectomy to debulk the vitreous of fungi.
- Intravitreal Inj. amphotericin B 5-10 mcg/0.1 ml or Inj. fluconazole 25 mcg/0.1 ml.
- Inj. amphotericin B 0.5-1.5 mg/kg/day slow infusion over 2-6 hours. (50 mg vial in
powder form and is dissolved in 5% dextrose) for 10-14 days. Or
- Tab. fluconazole 400 mg loading dose followed by 200 mg daily, total dose should not
exceed 600 mg/day. In children 12 mg/kg loading dose followed by 6 mg/kg/day.Or
- Tab. ketoconazole 200 mg orally 2 times a day or daily. In children above 2 years of age,
3.3-6.6 mg/kg/day.
- Homatropine 2% eye drops 4 times a day or atropine 1% eye ointment 2
times a day.
Patient education
 All patients with open globe injury must contact an ophthalmologist after getting initial
treatment.
 Cataract operated cases should never ignore pain, tearing and photophobia and decrease in
vision in the operated eye and must consult the ophthalmologist at the earliest.
OPTIC NEURITIS
Optic neuritis includes inflammatory and demyelinating disorders of the optic nerve like
papillitis (inflammation of the optic disc), retrobulbar neuritis (inflammation of retro-ocular
portion of optic nerve) and neuroretinitis (when both optic nerve and retina are inflamed).
Etiology may be hereditary, systemic bacterial/viral infections, endophthalmitis, orbital
cellulitis, demyelinating disorders or idiopathic in nature.
Salient features
188

Eye Diseases
 Sudden, progressive and profound visual loss is the hallmark of acute optic neuritis.
 Decreased dark adaptation and impairment of colour vision, visual obscuration in bright light
and episodic obscuration on physical exertion, hot bath, fatigue etc.
 Depth perception, particularly for the moving object may be impaired (Pulfrich’s
phenomenon). Patient may complain of mild dull eye ache. It is more marked in patients
with retrobulbar neuritis than with papillitis. Pain is usually aggravated by ocular
movements, especially in upward or downward directions due to attachment of some fibers
of superior rectus to the dura mater.
 Marked abnormality in papillary responses to light reflex (sluggish or afferent pupil defect).
 Fundus examination reveals hyperaemia of the disc and blurring of the margins. Disc
becomes oedematous and physiological cup is obliterated. Retinal veins are congested and
tortuous. Splinter haemorrhages and fine exudates may be seen on the disc.
 Slit-lamp examination may reveal inflammatory cells in the vitreous. The most common
field defect in optic neuritis is a relative central or centrocaecal scotoma.
Pharmacological treatment
 Efforts should be made to find out and treat the underlying cause. There is no effective
treatment for idiopathic and hereditary optic neuritis and that associated with
demyelinating disorders.
 Corticosteroid therapy may shorten the period of visual loss, but will not influence the
ultimate level of visual recovery in patients with optic neuritis.
 Oral prednisolone therapy alone is contraindicated in the treatment of acute optic neuritis,
since, it did not improve visual outcome and was associated with a significant increase in
the risk of new attacks of optic neuritis.
 Indications for intravenous methylprednisolone in acute optic neuritis patients with a
normal brain MRI scan are:
- Visual loss in both eyes simultaneously or subsequently within hours or days of each
other.
- When the only good eye is affected.
- When the slow progressive visual loss continues to occur.
 Inj. methylprednisolone 1gm/day (or 15 mg/kg/day) intravenously in 2-4 divided doses
for 3 days followed by Tab. prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day orally for 11 days tapered over the
next week.
Patient education
 Explain the recurrent nature of the disease and that permanent vision loss can occur.
 Avoid factors provoking transient visual obsurations like physical exertion, hot weather,
stress, anger etc.
DIABETIC RETINOPATHY
189

Eye Diseases
It is the microangiopathy of retinal vasculature occurring in long standing diabetes mellitus
classified as non proliferative and proliferative. It is the sixth leading cause of blindness in
the world. Risk factors include increased duration of diabetes, uncontrolled diabetes,
abnormal lipid profile, smoking, renal disease etc.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Early diagnosis, proper diabetic control, regular follow up and fundus examination are
important. In certain cases laser photocoagulation and vitrectomy surgery can help.
Pharmacological treatment
 No tested or proven pharmacological treatment exists which can delay, prevent or
curdiabetic retinopathy.
Patient education
 Explain the importance of yearly fundus examination. Laser treatment can prevent
deterioration of vision but cannot correct existing visual defects.
RETINAL DETACHMENT
Retinal detachment (RD) is the separation of the sensory retina from retinal pigment
epithelium. It may be localized or entire retina may be involved. Retinal detachment that
includes the macula results in significant visual loss. The three types are Rhegmatogenous
RD, exudative RD and tractional RD.
Salient features
 Rhegmatogenous RD is characterized by formation of a tear in the retina. Symptoms include
flashes of light, presence of floaters in visual field and loss of central vision, if macula is
involved. The diagnosis is done by examination of the fundus with indirect ophthalmoscopy.
The retina appears grey wit oscillating folds.
 Tractional RD is caused by gliotic bands on retina.
 Exudative RD is caused by collection of serous fluid between neurosensory retina and retinal
pigment epithelium.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Treatment of choice is reattachment surgery involving identification of all retinal breaks
areas of vitreous or retinal tractions and induction of aspectic chorioretinal inflammation
around the breaks to seal them.
 Ensuring chorioretinal apposition by approximating choroid/retinal pigment epithelium to
neurosensory retina by external tamponade, internal tamponade and drainage of subretinal
fluid
 Adhesion between retinal pigment epithelium and retina can be achieved by cryotherapy,
diathermy or photocoagulation.
Pharmacological treatment
190

Eye Diseases
No pharmacological treatment which can prevent or cure rhegmatogenous RD. Exudative RD
due to inflammatory conditions like panuveitis can be treated with systemic corticosteroids as
described in treatment of uveitis. The refractory patients can be treated with
immunosuppresants.
Patient education
 Patients with high myopia, family history of RD, post cataract surgery, past episodes of
chorioretinal inflammation should be warned about the premonitory signs of impending
RD (sudden onset of floaters, flashes of light and sudden obscuration of one part of visual
field). In such cases, an opthalmologist should be contacted immediately.
VITAMIN A DEFICIENCY
The term xerophthalmia is now reserved (by a joint WHO and USAID Committee, 1976) to
cover all the ocular manifestations of vitamin A deficiency, including not only the structural
changes affecting the conjunctiva, cornea and occasionally retina, but also the biophysical
disorders of retinal rods and cones functions.
Salient features
 Vitamin A deficient diet is the main reason especially in young growing children of
developing countries. It is usually associated with protein energy malnutrition.
 In some cases, decreased absorption of vitamin A due to gastro-intestinal disorders like lipid
malabsorption or chronic alcoholism can occur.
 Presentation can be as
- Nyctalopia-night blindness is the earliest presenting symptom.
- Conjunctival xerosis
- Bitot spot: It is a metaplastic keratinisation of conjunctiva.
- Persistent epithelial defect (usually in chronic alcoholics) and corneal ulcer
- Keratomalacia: adiffuse corneal necrosis occurring in severe vitamin A deficiency.
WHO Classification
Primary signs Secondary signs
X1: Conjunctival Xerosis: XN: Night blindness
X1A-without Bitot spot XF: Fundal changes
X1B-with Bitot spot XS: Corneal scarring
X2: Corneal Xerosis
X3: Cornel ulceration
X3A: < 1/3 of corneal ulceration
X3B: > 1/3 of corneal ulceration
Pharmacological treatment
191

Eye Diseases
 Severe xerophthalmia is a medical emergency, so treatment should begin as early as
possible.
 Treatment is aimed at restoring vitamin A level to normal and addressing associated
protein energy malnutrition.
- Oral vitamin A:
0-6 month of age : 50,000 IU (on 0 day, 1st day & after 4 weeks)
6-12 month of age : 1 lakh IU (on 0 day, 1st day & after 4 weeks)
More than 1 year of age : 2 lakh IU (on 0 day, 1st day & after 4 weeks)
 Intramuscular water soluble vitamin A is given to children with persistent vomiting or
severe malabsorption.
 Topical preservative free lubricating eye drops and antibiotic drops (e.g. moxifloxacin
eye drops 1 to 6 hourly) to prevent secondary infection can be given.
Patient education
 Regular consumption of Vitamin A rich foods particularly fresh dark green leafy
vegetables which constitute very rich and cheap sources.
 Pregnant women and lactating mothers should also consume Vitamin A rich diet
regularly.
 Breast feeding including feeding of new born with rich colostrum.
 High dose universal distribution schedule for prevention of Vitamin A deficiency.
- Infants less than 6 months of age –50,000 IU orally
- Infants 6-12 months of age -100,000 IU orally.
- Children more than 12 months -200,000 IU orally every 4-6 months till 5 years of age.
 Mothers -200,000 IU orally within 8 weeks of delivery.
SENILE CATARACT
It is age related opacification of crystalline lens affecting persons of either sex usually above
the age of 50 years. By 70 years, over 90% of the individuals develop senile cataract. The
condition is usually bilateral, but almost always one eye is affected earlier than the other.
Salient features
192

Eye Diseases
 Gradual painless progressive diminution of vision in one or both eyes. Symptoms include
glare, uniocular diplopia or polyopia, coloured haloes, distortion of images and misty vision
and fixed black spots in visual field. Ocular examination reveals greyish white to white
lenticular opacity on torch light examination which depends on the stage of cataract.
Depending upon the location and maturation of cataract, the visual acuity may range from
6/9 to just perception of light.
 Slit-lamp examination should be performed with a fully-dilated pupil. The examination
reveals complete morphology of opacity (site, size, shape, colour pattern and hardness of the
nucleus).
Surgical treatment
No medical management can halt the progression of cataract. Surgery in the form of small
incision cataract surgery or phacoemulsification is the preferred option.
Patient education
 Do not wait for maturation of cataract for undergoing lens extraction.
 Secondary glaucoma or other complications can develop if total cataract remains
unoperated fora long time.
 Visual rehabilitation in early post operative period is faster in small incision cataract
surgery.
REFRACTIVE ERRORS
Refractive errors (ametropia) are the optical defects of eye in which the parallel rays of light
entering the eye do not come to focus on the fovea centralis. Ametropia includes myopia,
hypermetropia and astigmatism.
Salient features
 Hypermetropia (hyperopia) or long-sightedness is the refractive state of the eye wherein
parallel rays of light coming from infinity are focused behind the retina with accommodation
being at rest. Symptoms include astheopic symptoms (tiredness and watering of eyes, frontal
headache) and defective vision, more for near vision.
 Myopia or short-sightedness is a type of refractive error in which parallel rays of light
coming from infinity are focused in front of the retina when accommodation is at rest.
 Astigmatism - The optical power of the cornea in different planes is not equal. Parallel rays
of light passing through these different planes are brought to different points of focus.
Surgical treatment
 No pharmacological treatment is available for ametropia.
 Accurate retinoscopy and corrective spectacles or contact lens.Keratorefractive surgery
STRABISMUS (SQUINT)
193

Eye Diseases
Salient features
Any child presenting with strabismus should have the following conditions ruled out:
 Refractive error - refraction should be done under full cycloplegia i.e. Atropine Ointment 1%
3 times a day for 3 days prior to performing retinoscopy. If any refractive error is present,
that should be fully corrected by spectacles for at least 3-6 months, before performing
definitive surgical therapy for strabismus.
 Any opacity in the media e.g. cataract, corneal opacity, retinoblastoma etc.
 Amblyopia element whether induced by strabismus or vice versa should be treated with
occlusion therapy or other modality before treating strabismus.
Surgical treatment
 Correct the refractive error or associated cataract, corneal opacity etc. Fusion exercises
for intermittent exotropia and other orthoptic exercises. Definitive therapy is surgical
realignment of axis once other associated features have been treated.
Patient education
Functional improvement in strabismus is best between 3-5 years of age. It is a misconception
that squint is spontaneously corrected as the child grows.
COMPUTER VISION SYNDROME
Computer Vision Syndrome (CVS) is the complex of eye and vision problems related to near
work which are experienced during or related to computer use.
Salient features
 Characterized by visual symptoms which result from interaction with a computer display
or its environment. In most cases, symptoms occur because the visual demands of the
task exceed the visual abilities of the individual to comfortably perform the task.
 Contributing factors: Decreased blinking reflex, prolonged near focusing efforts,
repeated head posture change/fixation in a wrong posture, Environmental factors of
computer workstations like contrast and resolution of the display, viewing distances and
angles, room lighting, sustained viewing etc.
 Symptoms include tiredness of eyes, headache, blurred near and distant vision, dry or
irritated eyes, neck pain and/or backaches, diplopia (double vision), difficulty in re-
focusing the eyes. Diagnostic tests include tear film break-up time and Schirmer test.
Cervical spondylitis, anxiety and migraine are the differential diagnosis.
Non-pharmacological treatment
194

Eye Diseases
 Counselling regarding the syndrome and work environment modification
Steps for relieving computer eye strain
- Get a computerized eye exam before start using computer. Repeat once a year.
- Use proper lighting. Eliminate exterior light by closing drapes, shades or blinds. Reduce
interior lightingby using lower intensity bulbs and tubes.
- Minimize glare: To install an anti-glare screen on your monitor. Paint bright white walls a
darker color with a matt finish.
- Upgrade your display. Use LCD monitor instead of a CRT monitor.
- Adjust the brightness and contrast of your computer screen.
- Blink more often.
- Exercise your eyes: Follow 20-20-20 rule i.e. after every 20 minutes, look at 20 feet
distance for 20 seconds.
- Take frequent breaks - two 15-minute breaks -four additional five-minute "minibreaks"
throughout the work day (6-8 hrs).
- Modify your workstation. Proper posture during computer work. Position computer
screen 20 to 24 inches from your eyes. The center of your screen should be about 10 to 15
degrees below your eyes. Top of the screen tilted back slightly (10-20 degree) away from
the operator.
- Consider customized eyeglasses specific for use during work on a computer screen. Anti-
reflective coating in the lenses should be used and avoid contact lens use during computer
work.
Pharmacological treatment
 Tear substitute should be considered if symptoms are aggravated during computer work.
Commercially available tear substitutes include sodium carboxymethylcellulose and
hydroxypropyl methylcellulose.
References
1. Kanski, Clinical Ophthalmology 7thedition
2. Ready reckoner in ophthalmology by AIOS
3. Wills Eye Manual, The: Office and Emergency Room Diagnosis and Treatment of Eye Disease, 5th Edition
4. Shields textbook of glaucoma; 6theditionOrbit, Eyelids, and Lacrimal SystemSection 72011-2012 by
American Academy of Ophthalmology.
195