Chapter 13
OBSTETRICS AND GYNECOLOGY
NORMAL PREGNANCY
It is a transient physiological state during a woman's reproductive years. However, it requires
utmost antenatal care regarding diet, lifestyle and drug therapies to achieve a good foetal
outcomewith minimal maternal morbidity and mortality.
Instruct the woman regarding
 Diet
Caloric requirements depend on the physical work done by the women. The increased
requirement of 300 cals for the pregnancy state is to be made available by exogenous supply
of diet. An ideal pregnancy diet should be light, nutritious, easily digestible and rich in
proteins, vitamins and minerals. The diet should consist of at least half-a-liter of milk, plenty
of green leafy vegetables (one katori serving in each meal) and fruits as available, in addition
to normal Indian diet consisting of a balanced cereals and pulses combination. Foods rich in
iron like green vegetables, jaggery, and protein rich foods like nuts should be stressed upon.
Fat consumption can be predominantly of animal source so as to take care of vitamins A & D.
 Exercise
Any exercise, the woman is accustomed to can be continued, but not to the point of fatigue.
Antenatal exercises done under medical supervision are useful in pregnancy and labour. No
new exercise should be initiated during pregnancy. Sedentary women should be allowed only
walking. Women with multiple foetuses and complications like heart disease, pregnancy
induced hypertension, intrauterine growth retardation, history of preterm labour, anti partum
hemorrhage (APH), threatened abortion should not exercise.
 Clothing
Should be non-constricting.
 Travel
Road travel is allowed with safety belt. Traveling in a pressurized aircraft is of no risk, should
walk about every 2 hours.
 Employment
Jobs requiring prolonged standing (>8 hours/day) are associated with a minimum risk of pre-
term delivery.
 Clinical check up
During each antenatal visit, BP, weight-gain, oedema feet, cardio-vascular, respiratory and
breast examination symphyseal-fundal height, presentation, foetal heart rate(s), amniotic fluid
volume, inquiry about daily foetal movement charting, and pelvic assessment at 38 weeks. Rh
negative women (with Rh positive husband) need to be monitored on similar lines with
additional testing with Indirect Coomb's test (ICT) at first visit, 28 weeks and 34-36 weeks.
Immunoglobulin 300 mcg IM is recommended in ICT negative patients at 28 weeks of
pregnancy and postpartum 300 mcg IM if baby is Rh positive. ICT positive patients are to be
229

Obstetrics andGynecology
managed only at centers with facilities for amniocentesis and/or cordocentesis, amniotic fluid
optical density estimation and intrauterine foetal transfusions.
Tab. folic acid 5 mg once daily, at least 3 months before conception, and continue till 12
weeks of gestation. Dose of iron (60-100 mg elemental iron) and folic acid (Tab. iron folic
acid) once daily and Tab. calcium gluconate 500 mg tablet twice daily from 16 weeks till 3
months postpartum.
 Immunization
2 doses of tetanus toxoid 4-6 weeks apart, (MMR vaccines is contraindicated). Rest of the
vaccines can be administered, if indicated as in non pregnant state.
 Investigations during pregnancy
Haemoglobin, urine (routine and microscopy), blood groups and Rh typing, screen for
syphilis, hepatitis B infection, HIV, cervical cytology, ultrasound for foetal anomalies if
indicated, diabetes screening
Patient education
 Advise the woman on how to prepare for delivery, when to go, what to bring and where to
go in emergency. Explain the danger signals when she should report to the health center
immediately, day or night, without waiting such as vaginal bleeding, convulsions, severe
headaches with blurred vision, severe abdominal pain, fast or difficult breathing, escape of
fluid from vagina or change in frequency or intensity of foetal movements, persistent
vomiting, oliguria. She should go to the health centre as soon as possible if any of the
following signs: swelling on face or hands, abdominal pain, fever, dysuria, feels ill.
 Explain about black staining of stools due to oral iron, therefore, not to worry about it.Iron
and calcium supplements should be taken at different times of the day at least 2 hours
apart.
 Discuss birth spacing after delivery and counsel on the importance of family planning.
Give advice on correct and consistent use of condoms for dual protection from sexually
transmitted infections or HIV and pregnancy
 Sexual intercourse should be avoided when abortion/pre-term labour threatens, and during
last 4 weeks in any pregnancy.
 Bowel: constipation, fissures and haemorrhoids are common during pregnancy and should
be treated with fluids, exercise and bulk laxatives and stool softeners.
 Smoking, alcohol and drug abuse are contraindicated. Caffeine is best avoided.
 Daily foetal movement charting (DFMC): After 28 weeks, the woman should keep foetal
movement count.
 Follow-up visits: every 4 weeks till 28 weeks, every 2 weeks till 36 weeks and weekly
thereafter.
NAUSEA AND VOMITING IN EARLY PREGNANCY
Nausea and vomiting of mild to moderate intensity are especially common complaints in
early pregnancy until about 16 weeks. In few cases it may progress to hyperemesis.
230

Obstetrics andGynecology
Salient features
 Common complaint on rising in the morning but sometimes occurs at other times of the day;
vomitus is usually small and clear and doesn't produce any impairment of health or restrict the
normal activities of the pregnant woman.
 Severe nausea and persistent vomiting progress to hyperemesis leading to weight loss, ketosis
and there may be muscle wasting. There are usually signs of dehydration with postural
hypotension and tachycardia.
 Diagnosis is by exclusion of medical and surgical causes of vomiting like liver or GIT
disorders, pyelonephritis, diabetes mellitus etc. and molar (and multiple) pregnancy should be
ruled out in all cases of hyperemesis by ultrasound.
Mild and moderate cases
Non pharmacological treatment
 Reassurance and advice to take frequent small, dry carbohydrate rich meals and avoid
fatty orspicy foods, especially avoid large volume of drinks in the morning.
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. doxylamine succinate 10 mg + Tab. pyridoxine HC1 10 mg 1-2 tablets at bed time.
If required one more tablet can be added in the morning and afternoon. Or
 Tab. metoclopramide 10 mg 2-4 times a day in moderately severe cases.
Hyperemesis gravidium
Non pharmacological treatment
Admit all cases in the hospital away from a stressful home environment.
 Stop oral intake of fluids and nutrition.
 Serum electrolytes and urinary ketones to be checked at admission and 6 hourly.
 Emotional support, psychiatric referral if required.
 Rule out multiple or molar pregnancy and liver disorders.
Pharmacological treatment
Adequate and appropriate fluid and electrolyte replacement. Normal saline or Ringer's lactate
solutions are appropriate solutions and KC1 is added as required.
If urinary ketones are present, then 1 liter of 10% dextrose is transfused over 3-4 hours.
For prolonged vomiting
 Tab. thiamine 25-50 mg 3 times a day (if orally tolerated). If vomiting are not controlled
with fluid and electrolytes replacement in 6 -8 hours.
 Inj. metoclopramide 10 mg IV or IM 8 hourly
 Inj. ranitidine 50-100 mg 6 hourly.
 If not controlled, Inj. promethazine chloride 25-50 mg IM or IV 8 hourly or Inj.
chlorpromazine 25-50 mg IM 4-6 hourly.
 Once vomiting is controlled for 24 hours, oral intake is gradually started. If well tolerated
then only IV fluids are omitted. At first dry carbohydrate foods are given in the form of
231

Obstetrics andGynecology
small meals at frequent intervals. Gradually full diet is introduced. In prolonged and
severe disease, parenteral nutrition may be necessary. Give Tab. metoclopramide 10 mg
TDS and Tab. ranitidine 150 mg BD
 If well tolerated for 48 hours, patient can be discharged from the hospital with dietary
advice, reassurance and continue Tab. metoclopramide for 5-7 days or longer depending
on the response.
Patient education
 Adjust timing of medication in relation to the time of sickness.
 This is a benign disorder and gets relieved by 14-16 weeks of pregnancy
FIRST TRIMESTER BLEEDING
Salient features
 Bleeding in first trimester of pregnancy can be due to pregnancy related complications
such as abortion (threatened/inevitable/ incomplete/missed), ectopic pregnancy and molar
pregnancy or due to local causes such as trauma, erosion, polyp, infection, premalignant
or malignant lesions.
 Local lesions are diagnosed on per speculum examination.
Treatment
 Abortion can be treated at a primary centre.
 Molar and ectopic pregnancy should be treated at a secondary/tertiary centre (Table 1)
 Check Bleeding time, clotting time, CRT in missed abortion
Surgical treatment
 Manual vacuum aspiration or suction evacuation, dilatation and evacuation or only
evacuation in all cases of abortion and molar pregnancy except threatened abortion.
 Laparotomy/laparoscopic removal of ectopic pregnancy except a few selected cases of
unruptured ectopic pregnancy.
Table 1. Diagnosis of etiology of first trimester bleeding
Diagnosis Clinical findings USG/ HCG
Threatened abortion Uterine size = period of gestation Consistent with live foetus
(POG) Internal Os closed
Inevitable abortion Uterine size = POG Cardiac activity + Internal
Internal Os open, excessive Os dilated
bleeding and pain
Incomplete abortion History of passing products of POC in uterine cavity
conception (POC) Uterine size < POG
Internal Os open/ closed
Missed abortion Uterine size < POG Internal Os closed Cardiac activity absent
Brownish discharge +
232

Obstetrics andGynecology
Molar pregnancy History of passing vesicles Honeycomb appearance
± Uterine size > or = or < than POG hCG levels very high
Internal Os open/closed
Ectopic pregnancy Cervical excitation + Pseudogestational sac
Unilateral tender fornix, empty uterine cavity
adnexal mass adenexal mass, HCG rise
<66% in 48 hours
Patient education
 Exact etiology of abortions is not always apparent. Very early abortions are often nature's
selection to abort a nonviable, chromosomally abnormal conceptus.
 Increased abortions are seen with increasing parity and maternal age. Recurrent abortions
3 or more consecutive abortions should be investigated before planning the next
pregnancy.
 Effective contraception should be initiated soon after abortion as ovulation can occur as
early as 2-3 weeks after an abortion.
THREATENED ABORTION
Non-pharmacological treatment
Bed rest
Pharmacological treatment
 Inj. pentazocin 15 mg and Inj. promethazine 12.5 mg IM stat for those who have pain and
are anxious. If not available Inj. diazepam 10 mg IM or Tab. alprazolam 0.5 mg.
 Tab. folic acid 5 mg daily.
 Monitor for the continuation of pregnancy after confirming cardiac activity by USG.
 Discharge the patient 48 hours after bleeding stops.
 Progesterone supplementation if serum progesterone < 15 ng/ml only after confirming
cardiac activity in cases of spontaneous conception.
Patient education
 To report immediately if bleeding recurs or it is more than normal periods.Continue bed
rest for at least 2 weeks.
 Abstinence till at least two follow-up visits in the next 4 weeks when normal continuation
of pregnancy is documented. High fiber diet to be given to avoid constipation.
 Need of follow up after 2 weeks for fetal growth by clinical and/or USG parameters.
After suction evacuation for abortion
 Reassurance if no living child.
 Need for contraceptive - can be started immediately after evacuation. Can resume coitus
after 4 weeks if no complications.
 When to attempt conception -after at least 6 months
233

Obstetrics andGynecology
SEPTIC ABORTION
Any abortion associated with fever and signs of pelvic or generalized sepsis are considered
septic abortion. Most septic abortions result from illegal abortions but sepsis may follow
spontaneous and elective abortions
Salient features
 Fever, tachycardia, abdominal distension and tenderness, pelvic tenderness, and purulent
vaginal discharge. In severe cases there may be endotoxic shock and end organ failure.
 Complications like injury to viscera like uterus and bowel, internal or external
haemorrhage, peritonitis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, renal failure, hepatic
failure, endotoxic shock and tetanus can occur.
Before starting antibiotic therapy, high vaginal or cervical swab and blood culture should be
obtained.
Pharmacological treatment
 IV fluids for correction of electrolyte imbalance
 Oxygen by facemask in severe cases. In cases of adult respiratory distress syndrome
intubation and ventilatory support is required, and hydrotherapy if required.
 If blood pressure is not controlled with fluid replacement, Inj. dopamine infusion in 5%
Dextrose 2 - 5 mcg/kg/min and dose titrated according to clinical and haemodynamic
response.
 In case of shock, acidosis is corrected by IV sodium bicarbonate 50-100 mEq in normal
saline.
 Inj. ampicillin 2 g stat followed by 500 mg IV 6 hourly(after test dose) Or
 Inj. cefuroxime or ceftazidime 1-2 g IV 2 times a day (after test dose).
 Inj. gentamicin 1.5mg/kg then 1mg/kg IV 8hourly or Inj. amikacin 250 - 500 mg IV 8
hourly.
 Inj. metronidazole 500mg IV 8hourly or Inj. clindamycin 600 mg IV 6 hourly
 Continue antibiotic therapy for 48-72 hours until culture sensitivity results provide an
indication for changing the initial antibiotic regimens or patient does not respond to
therapy. Monitor pulse, temperature, blood pressure, respiratory rate, urine output, and
serum electrolytes. In severe cases, central venous pressure (CVP) and arterial blood gas
(ABG) monitoring is required. Therapeutic goals are to maintain systolic BP >90 mmHg,
urine output >30 ml/min, arterial PO, >60 mmHg, and CVP 6 -12 cm of H O.
2
Surgical treatment
 Uterine curettage: if patient's condition is stable, within 1 hour of antibiotic therapy,
evacuation of the uterus by gentle curettage to remove infected products. If general
condition is low at admission, curettage after 6 -8 hours of antibiotic therapy and treat
hypovolaemia.
234

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Laparotomy in case of injury to the uterus, suspected injury to the gut, presence of
foreign body in the abdomen as evidenced by X ray or felt through the fornix, peritonitis
or colpotomy in cases of pelvic abscess.
ECTOPIC PREGNANCY
Treatment of ectopic pregnancy should be undertaken at a secondary/tertiary care level set
up. Laparoscopic surgery or laparotomy is done in all cases of ectopic pregnancy except in a
few selected cases that are highly compliant and reliable and fulfill the following criteria:
 Unruptured ectopic pregnancy in haemodynamically stable patient.
 Gestational sac size <3.5 cm in greatest diameter.
 Serum hCG titer < 10,000 mlU/ml.
 Gestation <6 weeks.
 Absence of foetal cardiac activity.
Pharmacological treatment (for unruptured ectopic pregnancy)
 Obtain pretreatment hCG titers, haemogram, liver and renal function tests.
 Inj. methotrexate 50 mg/sq meter body surface area IM given on day 1.
 Repeat hCG titers on day 4 and 7.
 If day 7, hCG titers reflect a drop of at least 15% from maximum levels then weekly hCG
titers till negative.
 If fall <15% or there is rise then repeat Inj. methotrexate.
Patient education
 Resolution of ectopic pregnancy may take up to 6 weeks.
 5-10% cases require surgery despite medical therapy.
 Signs and symptoms of tubal rupture such as vaginal bleeding, abdominal pain, weakness,
dizziness or syncope must be reported promptly.
 Patient should refrain from alcohol and folic acid containing vitamins during this period.
 Sexual intercourse should be avoided during therapy.
MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY
The government of India has legalized Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MTP) up to 20
weeks of gestation by MTP Act 1971. Under this act, pregnancy can be terminated under
following clauses:
Clauses and requirements
1. Damage to the life of the pregnant woman.
2. Grave injury to the physical or mental health of the pregnant woman.
3. Pregnancy caused by rape.
4. Substantial risk, that if the child was born, it would suffer from such physical or mental
abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped.
5. Failure of any contraceptive method or device.
235

Obstetrics andGynecology
Necessary consent form as laid down in the Act should be duly filled and signed. Opinion of
two registered medical practitioners is mandatory for second trimester MTP (>12 weeks).
First trimester MTP methods
Medical methods
 It can be done up to 49 days amenorrhoea after proper counseling and excluding
contraindications.
 Tab. mifepristone 200-600 mg given on day 1.
 On day 3 Tab. misoprostol 400mcg orally or 800 mcg vaginally in hospital. Woman
generally aborts in next 4-8 hours and USG on day 14 to confirm complete abortion.
 Asked to report if excessive bleeding anytime in between. The procedure should be done
onlyin centers approved under MTP Act.
Surgical method
 Suction and evacuation done in all centers approved under MTP Act. Manual Vacuum
Aspiration (MVA) can be done in all PHCs.
Patient education
 Details of the method and small risk of complications should be explained. Medical
method fails in around 5% cases and these will require surgical curettage.
 Patient should be motivated for concurrent contraception and option of all available
methods both temporary and permanent should be discussed.
Second trimester MTP methods
 To be conducted in secondary and tertiary care level. None of the second trimester
methods are 100% safe and effective. That is why many methods both surgical and
medical, are available and being used. For second trimester MTP medical methods are
preferred.
 Methods are usually combined so as to increase the success rate and to shorten induction
abortion interval. Most commonly extra amniotic 0.1% ethacridine lactate 10 ml per week
of gestation (maximum 150 ml) with IV oxytocin after 6-24 hours or IM 15 methyl
PGF2.α Abortion is induced in 32 –36 hours with a success rate of 75-80%.
 Better results if some method for cervical ripening is used 6 -12 hours before.
 If some method fails switch over to other method or surgical method
ANEMIA IN PREGNANCY
Prevalence of anaemia in pregnancy in India is 80% and severe anaemia is 10-15%. Causes
of anaemia in pregnancy are the same as those encountered in the non pregnant state.
However, iron deficiency anaemia is commonest in pregnancy. In about 40-50% of cases
there is associated folic acid deficiency. Anaemia in pregnancy is defined as haemoglobin
concentration of less than 11 g/dl and haematocrit of less than 33%. It is further classified
depending on Hb levels as mild 10-11 g%, moderate 7-10 g% and severe <7 g%.
236

Obstetrics andGynecology
Salient features
 Mild to moderate cases- weakness, exhaustion, lassitude, anorexia, glossittis, and
stomatitis, while severe cases present with palpitation, dyspnoea, oedema and cardiac
failure.
 Important basic investigations required are haemoglobin, haematocrit, total RBC counts,
peripheral smear for type of anaemia and haematological indices, plasma proteins and
stool for ova and cyst.
Iron deficiency anemia
All cases of severe anaemia to be admitted especially those with features of anoxia or cardiac
insufficiency.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Diet rich in iron - jaggery, green leafy vegetable, sprouted pulses, meat, cooking food in
iron utensils.
 Diet rich in protein -pulses, lentils, milk and milk products, nuts, eggs and meat.
Pharmacological treatment
 Oral iron therapy- ferrous sulfate and ferrous fumarate. Recommended dose is 200 mg
elemental iron daily in divided doses. Not to be taken with meals, milk, coffee or tea.
Continue therapy till blood picture returns to normal and then continue with 100 mg
elemental iron for 3 months to build up the stores. Government of India recommends
minimum of 100 mg of elemental iron and 5 mg folic acid for 100 days starting at 20
weeks (Common side effects are epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting, constipation, and
diarrhoea).
 Deworming to be done after first trimester, if necessary. Tab. mebendazole 100 mg 2
times a dayfor 3 days or Tab. albendazole 400 mg single dose.
Monitoring of response to therapy
Subjective improvement of feeling better, weight gain and improved appetite is seen after 1-2
weeks. Reticulocyte response observed in 5-10 days (increases to 5-6%) and rise in
Hb/haematocrit in 2-3 weeks. The concentration is expected to rise at the rate of 0.1-0.25
g/dl/day or 0.8 -1 g/dl/week. If no improvement in 3 weeks, reevaluate for: incorrect
diagnosis, non compliance, defective absorption, continuing loss, associated deficiencies.
Role of parenteral therapy is limited as rate of rise of haemoglobin with parenteral iron is
similar to oral iron preparation.
Specific indications
Severe intolerance to oral iron, malabsorption, non compliance and moderate to severe
anaemia in advanced pregnancy
Total dose of iron to be given is calculated using following formulae:
2.4 Xweight in kgXdeficit in Hb in gm + 500 mgshould be added for pregnancy.
(Caution:Oral iron is suspended at least 24 hours prior to therapy to avoid reaction).
Intravenous routeis to be given after hospitalization.
237

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Inj. iron dextran is diluted in 5% dextrose. Initial infusion is given slowly at 8 drops per
min. for half an hour to watch for reaction, and then increase gradually to 40 drops/min.
Total iron dose is administered in a single sitting. If >2000 mg then only half dose is
given in one day. Monitor for adverse reactions likerigors, chest pain, and hypotension. If
present stop the infusion.
 Inj. iron dextran or iron sorbitol complex (available as 50 mg ml) IM after an initial test
dose of 0.5 ml intramuscularly, the injections are given daily or on alternate days in doses
of 2 ml IM using Z technique. To prevent staining of skin one can pass small amount of
saline/air down the needle before withdrawing it.
 Inj. iron sucrose intravenously given in each infusion 200mg of elemental iron in100 ml
of 0.9% NaCl infused over 20-30 minutes. No test dose required. Two infusion of each
200 mg of elemental iron is recommended twice in a week.
(Caution: Emergency drugs to be kept ready for resuscitation in case of anaphylactic
reaction).
Indications for blood transfusion
Severe blood loss, severe anemia beyond 36 weeks of pregnancy or anemia refractory to oral
and parental therapy or anemic patient with anoxia or cardiac failure. Management of anemic
patients during labour:
 Propped up position, oxygen therapy.
 Sedation and pain relief.
 Cut short 2nd stage of labour byforceps.
 Active management of 3rd stage of labour with Inj. methylergometrine maleate 0.2 mg IV
at the delivery of anterior shoulder or injection oxytocin 10 U IM.
 Inj. methylergometrine to be avoided in patients of anaemia with cardiac failure.
 Packed cell transfusion if necessary and if Hb<5 g after giving diuretics.
MEGALOBLASTIC ANAEMIA IN PREGNANCY
Salient features
 Patients may be asymptomatic or may have vomiting, diarrhoea, pallor, hepatosplenomegaly,
and polyneuropathy.
 Diagnosis: is by MCV > 96.11 mc, MCH > 33 pg and MCHC normal. Peripheral smear
macrocytic anaemia with hypersegmentation of neutrophils, neutropenia and
thrombocytopenia.
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab.folic acid 5 mg daily to be continued for at least 4 weeks in puerperium.
 Inj. cyanocobalamine250 mcg intramuscular every month.
Dimorphic anaemia
 Both iron and folic acid in therapeutic doses.
Patient education
238

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Dietary advice as mentioned earlier.
 Common side effects of therapy should be explained to the patient. Explain to the patient
that stools turn black after oral iron therapy, so no need for concern.
 Iron supplementation should continue for at least 3 months in postpartum period.
 Adequate spacing of at least 3 years between two pregnancies.
PREGNANCY INDUCED HYPERTENSION (PIH)
 Hypertension is diagnosed when diastolic blood pressure is 90 mm Hg or more on two
consecutive readings taken four hours or more apart.
 If hypertension occurs after 20 weeks of gestation, during labour and/or within 48 hours
of deliveryit is classified as pregnancy induced hypertension.
 If hypertension occurs before 20 wks of gestation, it is classified as chronic hypertension.
 Diastolic blood pressure alone is an accurate indicator of hypertension in pregnancy.
Elevated blood pressure with proteinuria, is defined as pre-eclampsia.
 Women with pregnancy-induced hypertension disorders may progress from mild disease
to a more serious condition. The classes of pregnancy-induced hypertension are:
hypertension without proteinuria; mild pre-eclampsia; severe pre-eclampsia; eclampsia.
 Mild pre-eclampsia often has no symptoms.
 Increasing proteinuria is a sign of worsening pre-eclampsia.
 Oedema of the feet and lower extremities is not considered a reliable sign of pre-
eclampsia.
 In pregnancy-induced hypertension, there may be no symptoms and the only sign may be
hypertension.
PRE-ECLAMPSIA
Pre-eclampsia is one of the commonest causes of maternal and perinatal morbidity and
mortality. It affects around 5-8% of all pregnancies. Pre-eclampsia is principally a syndrome
of signs, occurring more frequently in primigravida. When superimposed with convulsions it
is termed as eclampsia. Other high risk factors are - multiple pregnancy, hydramnios, and
molar pregnancy.
Salient features
 Hypertension (blood pressure > 140/90 mmHg recorded at 4-6 hours interval) with
proteinuria and/or non-dependant oedema, developing after 20 weeks of gestation in a
previously normotensive nonproteinuric patient.
 Pre-eclampsia is considered mild if diastolic BP < 100 mmHg, protineuria trace to 1+ with
minimal elevation of liver enzymes.
 Signs of severe pre eclampsia are: BP > 160/110, 24 hour's urinary proteins >2 g, elevated
serum uric acid, thrombocytopenia (platelet count <50,000/ mm3), microangiopathic
haemolysis, raised liver enzymes, has diastolic BP 110 mmHg and foetal growth retardation.
239

Obstetrics andGynecology
Treatment
Hospitalize all cases. Definitive therapy is to terminate pregnancy. The choice between
immediate delivery and expectant management depends on: severity of disease, condition of
mother and foetus and period of gestation (POG).
Mild pre-eclampsia
Expectant management: in cases of mild pre-eclampsia without foetal and maternal
compromise, with gestational age less than 37 weeks.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Complete bed rest preferably in left lateral position and regular diet adequate in proteins
and calories with omission of extra table salt.
Pharmacological treatment
 Antihypertensive treatment is started if there is persistent diastolic blood pressure over
100 mmHg. Aim of treatment is to achieve a systolic BP about 130 mmHg and diastolic
BP around 90 mmHg. Tab. methyldopa 250 mg 8 hourly or 6 hourly (maximum dose 2
g/day)orTab. atenolol 50-100 mg once a day.
 If BP is not controlled in 72 hours with the above, add any of the following:
Cap. nifedipine 10 mg 8 hourly or Tab. nifedipine retard 10 mg 12 hourly (maximum 30
mg 12 hourly) orTab. labetalol 100-200 mg 8 hourly (maximum 600 mg 6 hourly).
 Daily monitoring of weight gain, BP, urine albumin, urine output.
 Weekly lab investigations - haemogram with platelet count, liver and kidney function
tests specially serum uric acid, fundoscopy.
 Foetal monitoring by clinical and USG growth assessment, daily foetal movement count,
non stress test twice weeklyand biophysical score weekly, doppler studies in IUGR.
 In case of mild pregnancy induced hypertension without proteinuria, if after
hospitalization BP is controlled with rest without any antihypertensive drug, patient can
be discharged after initial evaluation if no maternal/foetal compromise is detected. It can
be practiced only in reliable patients who will follow instructions for monitoring as
above, and also will report ominous symptoms immediately (ominous symptoms are
persistent severe headache, visual disturbances such as dimness of vision, double vision
or blindness, epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting and oliguria).
Definitive management
Induction of pregnancy by labour induction/caesarean section in the following conditions:
 Gestational age 37 weeks, foetal compromise like severe growth retardation,
oligohydramnios, abnormal non-stress test or biophysical score, maternal compromise
like development of features of severe pre-eclampsia, onset of labour, rupture of
membrane or bleeding.
Severe pre-eclampsia
Treatment is preferably done in a tertiary care center.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Observation in intensive care unit for 24 hours.
240

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Assessment of maternal and foetal conditions. BP monitoring 2-4 hourly, hourly urine
output monitoring, watch for sign and symptoms of impending eclampsia and foetal
distress.
 Lab Investigations: haemogram with platelet count, liver and kidney function tests,
urinary proteins, coagulation profile, fundus examination, obstetric ultrasound with BPS.
 Intravenous fluids Ringer's lactate at rate of 60 ml/h (maximum 125 ml/h).
Pharmacological treatment
The aim of the treatment is gradual lowering of blood pressure so that diastolic BP is
maintained between 90-100 mmHg.
Immediate management
 Tab. nifedipine 10 mg orally can be repeated after 30-60 min. (maximum dose 20 mg 4
hourly).
(Caution: Side effects-Tachycardia, headache, flushing, and aggravation of angina. Rapid
fall in BP can cause foetal distress).
 If BP is not controlled with oral treatment then IV drugs are started with intensive
monitoring.
 Inj. labetalol initial dose is 50 mg slow IV followed by infusion at 60 mg/h, doubling
every 15 min until BP is controlled or maximum dose 220 mg in 24 hours is reached.
Maintenance therapy
 After initial control of acute hypertension, patient is started on maintenance therapy with
antihypertensives as described in management of mild pre-eclampsia.
 Manage with antihypertensives, bed rest and more frequent maternal and foetal
monitoring.
Definitive management is induction of pregnancy
Pregnancy beyond 34 weeks -stabilize maternal condition and induce pregnancy.
Pregnancy less than 24 weeks -stabilize maternal condition and induce pregnancy.
Patient on expectant management develops following features: uncontrolled hypertension
despite maximum dose of 2 antihypertensive drugs, eclampsia, raised liver enzyme >2 time
with right upper quadrant pain and tenderness, pulmonary oedema, platelet < 1 lac/mm1,
creatinine > 1 mg/dl over baseline
After delivery, intensive monitoring should be continued for 72 hours with prophylactic
anticonvulsant continued till 24 hours postpartum. Dose of antihypertensives should be
gradually reduced.
Prophylactic anticonvulsants
 Required in women with severe pre-eclampsia especially in cases with signs and
symptoms of impending eclampsia. Dose is same as for eclampsia.
241

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Loading dose is magnesium sulfate - 4g IV as 20% solution over 20 minutes and 10 g IM
as (50% solution, 10 ml (5 g) in each buttock (total of 14 g) followed by second dose in
alternate buttocks every 4 hours.
 Before each dose, monitor for presence of patellar reflex, respiratory rate >16/min and
urine output > 25 ml/h. It should be discontinued after 24 hours after BP is lowered.
 After initial evaluation and stabilization of the patient further management is decided
depending on foetal maturity and maternal response.
 Expectant management- Considered if pregnancy is between 24-34 weeks and
hypertension controlled with maximum of two drugs, urine output is normal, lab
investigations are normal and no foetal compromise. Patient should be hospitalized till
delivery.
ECLAMPSIA
Salient features
 Occurrence of generalized convulsions associated with signs of pre eclampsia during
pregnancy, labour or within 7 days of delivery and not caused by epilepsy or other
convulsive disorders.
 Eclampsia occurs antepartum in 46%, intrapartum in 16% and postpartum in 36%
cases.
 Patient may develop acute left ventricular failure, cerebral haemorrhage, renal cortical
necrosis, DIC, foetal distress, abruptio placentae, foetal death and maternal death.
Treatment (to be managed at a tertiary care level)
Principles of management are control and prevention of recurrence of convulsion and control
of hypertension. Treat any complication that arise and deliver safely as soon as possible.
Continue anticonvulsant therapy 24 h after delivery or last fit whichever is latest.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Place the patient in left lateral position in a separate, quiet room.
 Secure and maintain airway.
 Use mouth gag or airway to prevent tongue biting/tongue falling back.
 Intubate if patient is deeply unconscious, poor arterial blood gases, extensive laryngeal
oedema, and extreme restlessness.
 Suction to remove oropharyngeal secretions. Oxygen by face mask.
 Set up IV access.
 Monitor heart rate and respiration, BP, urine output.
 Laboratory investigations: haemogram with platelet count, liver and kidney function tests,
urinary proteins, coagulation profile, serum electrolytes, fundus examination.
Pharmacological treatment
 Inj. magnesium sulphate loading dose of 14 g of which, 4 g as 20% solution given slowly
IV over 5 -10 minutes and 5 g as 50% solution given deep IM in each buttock (total 10 g
242

Obstetrics andGynecology
IM) If fits are not controlled in 15 min, give 2 g magnesium sulfate as 20% solution slow
IV.
 Maintenance dose 5 g magnesium sulfate as 50% solution deep IM every 4 hours in
alternate buttock Or Continuous IV regimen 4 g loading dose over 20 minutes followed
by 1 g/h slow continuous IV infusion. (Caution: Side effects are respiratory depression
and neuromuscular depression in mothers. Neonatal respiratory and neuromuscular
depression). If respiratory depression occurs, give calcium gluconate 1 g IV as 10% sol. If
respiratory arrest occurs, immediate endotracheal intubation and ventilation is to be done.
Monitor: Check for respiratory rate to be more than 16/min, patellar reflex to be present
and urine output >25 ml/h before giving magnesium sulfate. Or
 Inj. phenytoin loading dose of 15-25 mg/kg slow IV not exceeding 25 mg/ min diluted in
normal saline for first 750 mg and then 12.5 mg/min followed by 100 mg IV 8 hourly.
o ECG tracing to be taken every minute for 10 min during infusion of first 750 mg.
o Fluid management should be closely monitored to prevent complications such as
pulmonary oedema, left ventricular failure and adult respiratory distress
syndrome.
 Antihypertensives: as described in pre-eclampsia. Aim is to gradually lower the BP to
140-150/90-100 mm Hg.
Definitive management is termination of pregnancy irrespective of the foetal maturity.
Termination is by labour induction and vaginal delivery or caesarean section.
Indications of caesarean section are: all deeply unconscious patients unless delivery is
imminent, uncooperative patient due to restlessness, if vaginal delivery is unlikely to occur
within 6-8 hours from the onset of 1st eclamptic seizure or eclamptic seizures are not
controlled in 6-8 hours, and other obstetric indications.
Care after delivery
 Patients of eclampsia and severe pre-eclampsia need intensive monitoring for at least
initial 72 hours.
 Continue anticonvulsant till 24 hours after delivery or fit, whichever occurs later.
Graduallydecrease the dose of antihypertensives.
 Patient is discharged after 10-14 days of delivery or earlier if BP controlled without
antihypertensives.
 Follow up after 6 weeks for reevaluation.
Patient education
 Delivery is the only definitive treatment. Underlying disease remains till delivery and
complications can arise despite control of BP on treatment.
 Symptoms of severe pre-eclampsia like headache, vomiting, epigastric pain, decreased
urine output, blurring of vision should be immediately reported.
 Need for prolonged hospitalization.
 Early booking in next pregnancy as there is 25-30% risk of recurrence.
 Prophylactic measures like low-dose aspirin can be started in early pregnancy.
243

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Need for reevaluation at 6 weeks postpartum for reclassification and investigations of
hypertension and need for long-term antihypertensives. High risk of development of
chronic hypertension in later life.
PREGNANCY WITH DIABETES
Pregnancy can be complicated by pre-existing insulin dependent or noninsulin-dependent
diabetes or gestational diabetes. Gestational diabetes is defined as the carbohydrate
intolerance of variable severity with onset or first recognition during pregnancy.
Normal values -FBS less than 90 mg%, 2 hrs post prandial less than 120 mg%, RBS less
than 100. All pregnancies in diabetic females should be managed at a tertiary care center.
Non pharmacological treatment
Dietary advice
 Total daily calorie intake should be 30 Cal/kg.
 Complex carbohydrates should provide about 50% of the total calories, which should be
well distributed throughout the day.
 Meals should be split in 3 major meals and 3-4 snacks.
 High fiber diet is beneficial with 30-50 g fibers daily. Total diet should be distributed in 3
major meals and 3 mid meal snacks.
General measures
 Ultrasound assessment of foetal gestational age is to be done as early as possible.
 Foetal congenital anomalies should be ruled out by level II USG scan at 16 -18 weeks,
foetal echo at 22 weeks.
 Serial USG for foetal growth monitoring and biophysical scoring for assessment of foetal
well being after 32 weeks of gestation.
Pharmacological treatment
(I) Antenatal management.
Initial evaluation should include blood sugar and fundoscopy.
(a) Pre-existing diabetes
 Oral hypoglycaemic agents are contraindicated during pregnancy. If patient is on oral
hypoglycaemics, switch over to insulin therapy as soon as pregnancy is diagnosed.
 Inj. Insulin: 0.6-0.8 U/kg in 1st trimester, 0.7 - 0.9 U/kg in 2nd trimester and 0.8 - 1.2
U/kg in 3rd trimester.
 Usually a combination of intermediate acting and regular insulin in proportion of 2:1 is
given. 2/3 of the total requirement is given in the morning before breakfast and 1/3 is
given at night with regular insulin before dinner and intermediate at bedtime.
 Dose adjustment is done to maintain blood sugar level between fasting <95 mg% and
postprandial between 70 and 120 mg%.
 Sampling of blood should be done initially fasting, pre and post breakfast, pre and post
lunch, pre and post dinner and 2 AM regularly till controlled and then daily monitoring by
fasting and postmeal sugars.
244

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Hospitalization is required in cases of excessive vomiting, infections, maternal
complications like hypertension, retinopathy, nephropathy, foetal compromise like
macrosomia or intra uterine growth retardation (IUGR) or poor diabetic control.
(b) Gestational diabetes.
General management is same as outlined above.
 Patient is reassessed after 1 week. If control not achieved, insulin therapy is started.
Confirmation of blood sugar and regular insulin if required may be given before
breakfast, before lunch and before dinner or combination of regular and long acting can
be given before breakfast and dinner. Hypoglycaemia should be avoided.
 If fasting plasma sugar is > 105 mg% insulin is usually required for control. Regular
insulin is adjusted to normalize post breakfast glucose and intermediate for post lunch
glucose control. If evening or fasting glucose is elevated, 2nd daily injection is added. If
both are elevated, mixture of intermediate and regular insulin before dinner is added. If
only fasting is elevated, add intermediate acting insulin at bedtime. Or
 Inj. regular insulin 3 times a day before each main meal which can be combined with one
dose of intermediate acting insulin at bed time in case there is fasting hyperglycaemia.
 Apart from routine antenatal monitoring, blood sugar monitoring is required throughout
pregnancy. Therapeutic goal is to achieve plasma blood sugar levels fasting <95 mg% and
2 hour postprandial <120 mg%. When levels are high daily monitoring with insulin dose
adjustment is required. Once control is achieved, patient can be managed at home with
weekly blood sugar profile.
 Glycosylated Hb (HbA ) to be done in 1st trimester. Value of 9% or above
lc
indicates poor glycemic control, carries higher risk of congenital malformation; MTP may
be offered after proper evaluation.
(II) Management during labour
 In uncomplicated case with good glycaemic control pregnancy can be continued till
expected date of delivery.
 In presence of complications or foetal compromise pregnancy is terminated at 38 weeks
or earlier if required.
 If estimated foetal weight is >4 kg, caesarean section is performed.
 Labour is managed with intensive monitoring. Blood sugars are monitored 3-4 hourly aim
is to keep blood sugars between 100-120 mg%, using the sliding scale method using
regular insulin. In the postpartum period, the requirement of insulin is decreased.
Patient education
 In known diabetics, good blood sugar control should be achieved in preconception period
to avoid high risk of congenital anomalies.
 Strict adherence to the dietary advice and insulin therapy is essential throughout
pregnancy. As insulin requirements change throughout pregnancy therefore, frequent
blood sugar monitoring is required throughout pregnancy.
245

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Patient on insulin therapy should be told about symptoms of hypoglycaemia like
palpitations, sweating, dizziness, and its management.
 In cases of gestational diabetes, there is risk of recurrence in subsequent pregnancies and
later on risk of frank diabetes is there.
Contraceptive advice
Combined oral contraceptive pills and intrauterine devices are preferably avoided. Barrier
methods, progestogen only pills/ implants/injectables or sterilization can be offered.
PREGNANCY WITH HEART DISEASE
Organic heart disease in pregnancy is commonly due to rheumatic heart disease or congenital
heart disease. Pregnancy with its increased cardiovascular stress is a potential cause for
worsening of the existing heart disease.
Salient features
 All pregnant women with heart disease should be managed at a tertiary level center
with multidisciplinary approach. Depending on the limitation of physical activity
patient is classified into class I to IV of New York Heart Association (NYHA).
 Severe or progressive dyspnoea, progressive orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnoea, haemoptysis, syncope with exertion or chest pain related to effort or
emotions. Echocardiography is diagnostic
 Clinical approach to the pregnant women with heart disease is according to NYHA
class irrespective of the aetiology of the heart disease.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 NYHA class III and IV patients are to be hospitalized throughout the pregnancy while
class I and II can be managed as outdoor patients with more frequent antenatal visits and
admission at 38 weeks.
 Rest for 10 hours each night and 1 to 2 hour after each meal. Light housework and
walking without climbing stairs is permitted. No heavy work is allowed.
 Avoid high salt intake.
 Screen and treat at the earliest for excessive weight gain, abnormal fluid retention,
anaemia, pregnancy induced hypertension, infections.
Pharmacological (in consultation with the cardiologist)
In caseof rheumatic heart disease,
 Inj. benzathine penicillin 1.2 mega units IM 3 weekly.
 Treat any infections with appropriate antibiotics.
 In patients with mechanical prosthetic valves, give Inj. heparin throughout pregnancy to
maintain PTT at 1.5 to 2.5 times the normal control.
(Caution: Oral anticoagulants are not safe during pregnancy because of risk of congenital
anomalies in the foetus. But if required, can be given after first trimester and continued till 4
weeks before delivery. However, oral anticoagulants are safe during lactation).
246

Obstetrics andGynecology
Labour management
Caesarean is performed for only obstetrical indications.
 Pain relief is important during labour. Best option is to give continuous epidural
analgesia. It is contraindicated in women with intra cardiac shunts, aortic stenosis,
pulmonary hypertension, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Inj. morphine can also be
given for pain relief.
 Fluids should be restricted to 75 ml/min. Bolus oxytocin and methyl ergometrine should
be avoided.
 Antimicrobial prophylaxis for infective endocarditis required in all patients with cardiac
lesions undergoing any operative procedure or in labour.
 Inj. ampicillin 2 g and Inj. gentamicin 1.5 mg/kg (maximum 120 mg) IV or IM 30 min
before procedure followed by Cap. ampicillin 1 g IM or IV; or Cap. amoxycillin I g orally
6 hours after initial dose.
 If patient is allergic to penicillin Inj. vancomycin 1 g IV (over 1-2 hours) plus Inj.
gentamicin 1.5 g/kg (maximum 120 mg). Infusion to be completed within 30 min before
procedure.
Patient education
 Depending on the type and severity of cardiac lesion maternal risk of pregnancy should
be discussed with the patient ideally before pregnancy
 Option of corrective surgery preferably before pregnancy.
 2-5% risk of congenital heart disease in foetus if mother has congenital heart disease.
 Contraceptive advice: sterilization after 2 weeks, progestogen only method or barrier
method. Counsel husband for male sterilization preferably by nonscalpel vasectomy.
 In severe cases option of medical termination of pregnancy if pregnancy <12 weeks.
ANTEPARTUM HEMORRHAGE (APH)
Antepartum haemorrhage is defined as bleeding from genital tract after 20 weeks of
pregnancy and before completion of second stage of labour. It is a major cause of maternal
morbidity, mortality and perinatal loss. APH is due to placental cause in as high as 70% cases
and in 25-30% of cases cause may remain undetermined.
Salient features
 Clinical presentation varies depending on the severity of blood loss and cause of
bleeding
 In mild haemorrhage there may be no maternal or foetal compromise, while massive
haemorrhage can lead to hypovolaemic shock, coagulation failure, renal failure, foetal
distress and may result in maternal and foetal death.
 Ultrasound is confirmatory for placenta praevia.
247

Obstetrics andGynecology
Clinical presentation and severity of blood loss
Acute blood loss Clinical findings
1000 ml None
1000-1500 ml Orthostatic blood pressure changes, positive tilt test,
Pulse Pressure = 30 mmHg, reduced peripheral perfusion,
prolong capillary refill time
1500-2000 ml Cold clammy skin, tachycardia, tachypnoea, hypotension
> 2000 ml Profound shock, non-palpable pulse, intrauterine death of the
foetus
Causes of bleeding
Placenta praevia Abruptio placentae
Painless recurrent bleeding Associated pain abdomen
Relaxed non-tender uterus Tense tenderuterus
Free-floating presenting part Foetal parts not easily palpable
Abnormal lie Foetal heart irregular or absent
Pregnancy induced hypertension
Treatment
All patients of APH should be hospitalized in a well equipped center with facilities for blood
transfusion, emergency caesarean section and neonatal care unit.
(I) Massive hemorrhage
Following resuscitative measures are started immediately in massive hemorrhage.
Simultaneously prepare the patient for induction of labour by vaginal, caesarean section
depending on thecause of bleeding.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Establish intravenous line (one or two 14/16 gauge cannula
 Draw 20 ml blood for cross-match, haemogram, coagulation profile.
 Start fluid therapy rapidly as described below.
 Head down tilt, keep the patient warm.
 Oxygen by mask at 8 liters/minute.
 Empty bladder (Foley's catheter for urine output).
Pharmacological treatment
 IV fluids and blood replacement therapy.
 Definitive treatment is induction of labour by caesarean section in cases of placenta
praevia and by vaginal/caesarian section in cases of abruptio placentae.
(II) Mild APH
Expectant management
 In a case of placenta praevia without maternal and foetal compromise, expectant
management is planned if pregnancy is less than 37 weeks and patient is not having active
bleeding and labour pains.
248

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Hospitalize and bed rest with foetal and maternal monitoring.
 Inj. dexamethasone 12 mg IM 12 hourly for 2 doses should be given for foetal lung
maturity if POG < 35 weeks.
 Definitive treatment is induction of labour in case of following: occurrence of life-
threatening bleeding, pregnancy > 37 weeks, patient is in labour, in all cases of abruptio
placentae, baby is dead, congenitally malformed baby and bleeding recurring or
premature rupture of membranes on expectant management leading to maternal or foetal
compromise.
 Indications for caesarean section are: major degree placenta praevia, non vertex
presentation, case of abruptio placentae with live foetus if cervix is unfavourable (labour
is likely to be longer than 6 hours), Failure to progress after amniotomy and oxytocin
infusion and other obstetrical indications for caesarean section.
 Indications for vaginal delivery in APH are: Minor degree placenta praevia with vertex
presentation and slight bleeding with favourable cervix and abruptio placentae with mild
bleeding and no increased uterine tone, foetus is dead or has major congenital
malformation incompatible with life.
 For induction artificial rupture of membranes followed by oxytocin infusion is done.
Oxytocin infusion is continued in the postpartum period to prevent postpartum
haemorrhage. In abruptio placentae monitoring is done to detect maternal complication
early (pulse, BP,uterine height girth chart, vaginal bleeding, urinary output, BT,CT,clot
retraction time).
Patient education
 APHirrespective of type and cause results in increased perinatal morbidity and mortality.
 Incidence of placental abruption and placenta praevia are both increased with increasing
age and parity.
 Hypertension, cigarette smoking, cocaine abuse etc. predispose to placental abruption.
PREMATURE RUPTURE OF MEMBRANES
Prelabour rupture of membranes (PROM) is rupture of the membranes before labor has
begun. PROM can occur either when the fetus is immature (preterm or before 37 weeks) or at
term.
General management
 Confirm accuracy of calculated gestational age, if possible.
 Per speculum examination to assess vaginal discharge (amount, colour, odour) and
exclude urinary incontinence.
Diagnosis of vaginaldischarge(Table 2)
a) Light bleeding: takes longer than five minutes for a clean pad or cloth to be soaked.
b) Determine cause and treat accordingly.
Confirm diagnosis
 The typical odour of amniotic fluid confirms the diagnosis.
249

Obstetrics andGynecology
 If membrane rupture is not recent or when leakage is gradual, confirming the diagnosis
may be difficult:
 Place a vaginal pad over the vulva and examine it (visually and by odour) one hour later.
 On per speculum examination: Fluid may be seen coming from the cervix or forming a
pool in theposterior fornix; and on coughing; there may a gush of fluid.
 If available, perform tests:
-Thenitrazine test depends upon the fact that vaginal secretions and urine are acidic while
amniotic fluid is alkaline.
- For the ferning test, spread some fluid on a slide and let it dry. Examine it with a
microscope. Amniotic fluid crystallizes and may leave a fern-leaf pattern. False
negatives are frequent.
Table 2. Clinical presentation of patients with vaginal discharge in pregnancy
Presenting symptoms Present symptoms and signs sometimes Probable
and symptoms & signs present diagnosis
Watery vaginal discharge • Sudden gush or intermittent leaking of fluid Premature
Fluid seen at introitus rupture of
•No contractions within 1 hour membranes
Foul smelling watery • Fever/chills Amnionitis
discharge after 22 weeks • Abdominal pain
• History of loss of fluid
• Tender uterus
• Rapid fetal heart rate
• Light vaginal bleeding
Foul smelling • Nohistory of loss of fluid Vaginitis
vaginal discharge • Itching, Frothy/curdish discharge or cervicitis
• Abdominal pain
• Dysuria
Bloody vaginal discharge •Abdominal pain Antepartum
Loss of fetal movements haemorrhage
• Heavy, prolonged vaginal bleeding
Treatment
 If there is vaginal bleeding with intermittent or constant abdominal pain, suspect abruptio
placentae.
 If there are signs of infection (fever, foul-smelling vaginal discharge), give antibiotics as
for amnionitis
 If there are no signs of infection and the pregnancy is less than 37 weeks (when fetal
lungs are more likely to be immature): give antibiotics to reduce maternal and neonatal
infective morbidity and to delay delivery
 Pre-labourrupture of membranes
250

Obstetrics andGynecology
- Tab. erythromycin 250 mg by mouth three times per day for seven days or amoxicillin
500 mg by mouth three times per day for seven days;
- Consider transfer to the most appropriate service for care of the newborn, if possible
- Give corticosteroids to the mother to improve fetal lung maturity: betamethasone 12
mg IM, two doses 24 hours apart or Inj. dexamethasone 6 mg IM, four doses 12
hours apart.
Note: Corticosteroids should not be used in the presence of frank infection.
 Induce labour using oxytocin at 37 weeks and give prophylactic antibiotics to help reduce
Group B streptococcus infection in the neonate, even if the woman received antibiotics
previously: penicillin G 2 million units IV every six hours until delivery; or Inj.
ampicillin 2 g IV every six hours until delivery.
 If there are palpable contractions and blood-stained mucus discharge, suspect preterm
labour.
 If there areno signs of infection and thepregnancy is 37 weeks or more:
- If the membranes have been ruptured for more than 18 hours, give prophylactic
antiboitics to help reduce Group B streptococcus infection in the neonate.
- Assess the cervix
- If thecervix is favourable (soft, thin, partly dilated), induce labour using oxytocin.
- If the cervix is unfavourable (firm, thick, closed), ripen the cervix using
prostaglandins and infuse oxytocin or deliver by caesarean section.
Amnionitis
 Give a combination of antibiotics until delivery
- Inj. ampicillin 2 g IV every six hours; plus gentamicin 5 mg/kg body weight IV every 24
hours
- If thewoman delivers vaginally, discontinue antibiotics postpartum
- Ifthewoman has a caesarean section, continue antibiotics and give Inj. metronidazole
500 mg IV every eight hours until the woman is fever-free for 48 hours.
 Assess the cervix
- If thecervix is favorable (soft, thin, partly dilated), induce labour using oxytocin
- If thecervix is unfavourable (firm, thick, closed), ripen the cervix using prostaglandins
and infuse oxytocin or deliver by caesarean section.
 If metritis is suspected (fever, foul-smelling vaginal discharge), give antibiotics.
 If newborn sepsis is suspected, arrange for a blood culture and antibiotics.
PRETERM LABOR
Onset of labour pains in pregnant women after 20 weeks and before 37 weeks of gestation
associated with progressive dilatation and effacement of the cervix is known as preterm
labour.
251

Obstetrics andGynecology
Salient features
 Uterine contraction of duration of 30 sec or more at interval of 10 minutes or less
accompanied by cervical dilatation and effacement with or without leaking or
bleeding per vaginum.
 Risk factors include: low socioeconomic status, heavy manual labour, extremes of
age (<20 years and >40 years), previous history of abortion or preterm delivery,
cervical or vaginal infection, multiple gestation or over distended uterus, hypoxic
conditions like anaemia, heart disease, preeclampsia, IUGR, foetal congenital
malformations and antepartum haemorrhage in present pregnancy.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Hospitalization with complete bed rest, preferably in a centre with neonatal intensive care
unit.
 Laboratory investigations: haemogram, urine culture, endocervical swab for culture and
sensitivity.
Pharmacological treatment
 Inj. pentazocine 15mg + Inj. promethazine 25 mg IM stat and can be repeated 8 hourly.
 Immediate tocolysis in pregnancies <35 week
 If membranes are intact and labour is not advanced (cervical dilatation <4 cm), there is no
indication for immediate delivery and no contraindication for tocolysis.
 Inj. isoxsuprine HCl 10 mg IM every 6 hours in case of mild contraction; Intravenous
infusion if strong contractions are established 0.2-0.4 mcg/min in 5% dextrose. Maximum
dose is 0.8 mcg/min to be continued at least 2 hours after the contractions cease.
Followed by IM therapy for 24 hours.
(Caution: Side effects tachycardia and hypotension, hypokalaemia, neonatal tachycardia,
hypotension and rarely pulmonary oedema and acute respiratorydistress syndrome). Or
 Inj. ritodrine infusion 3 ampoules (150 mg) in 500 ml of 5% dextrose or ringer lactate at
50- 100 mcg/min (5-6 drops/min), increase by 50 mcg every 10 min till contractions
cease or side effects appear (maximum dose 350 mcg/min), continue for 12 hour after
contractions stop. This is followed by oral treatment - 10 mg every 2 hours for 24 hours
then 10-20 mg every 4-6 hours. (Contraindications: Poorly controlled diabetes or thyroid
disease, sickle cell disease). Or
 Cap. Nifedipine 30 mg loading dose followed by 10-20 mg every 4-6 hours.
(Caution: Do not administer along with magnesium sulfate; contraindicated in maternal
hypotension (< 90/50 mmHg), cardiac disease. Use with caution in renal disease.
Maternal side effects include flushing, headache, nausea, dizziness, and hypotension.) Or
 Inj. magnesium sulfate 4-6 g as 20% solution bolus over 30 minutes followed by infusion
of 4-6 g/h. (Contraindicated in patients with myasthenia gravis, cardiac decompensation.
Use with caution in renal disease. It can cause flushing, lethargy, headache, muscle
252

Obstetrics andGynecology
weakness, dryness of mouth, nausea and foetal distress, transient non-reactive non-stress
test (NST).
 Monitor pulse, BP, and cessation of the uterine contractions. If pulse rate >120/min and
BP < 90/50 mmHg stop tocolysis. Monitoring in magnesium sulfate therapy is as outlined
in eclampsia. Monitor for onset of chorioamnionitis (fever, tachycardia with uterine
tenderness).
Maintenance therapy
 Tab. isoxsuprine orally 10 mg 6 hourly or 20 mg 12 hourly (maximum daily-dose is 40 to
80 mg/day) to be continued till 34 weeks of pregnancy (long term therapy is
controversial).
 In pregnancies at 28 -34 weeks of maturity, steroids are given for foetal lung maturity.
 Inj. betamethasone 12 mg IM 2 doses 24 hours apart or Inj. dexamethasone 6 mg IM four
doses 12 hours apart or 12 mg IM two doses 12 hours apart.
(Caution: Contraindicated if clinical or laboratory evidence of chorioamnionitis is
present).
 Cap. ampicillin 500 mg or erythromycin 500 mg 4 times a day for 5-7 days, only if
PROM is present.
 Patient may be discharged after 1 week of tocolysis followed by regular antenatal
surveillance.
Delivery
In cases of ineffective tocolysis or with contraindications for tocolysis, labour is allowed to
progress and mode of delivery is decided as per obstetric indications. Careful foetal
monitoring required throughout labour. If any sign of hypoxia, caesarean section is better but
foetus should have a fairly good chance of survival depending on neonatal care facility.
Patient education
 Restricted physical activity after discharge.
 Sexual abstinence till at least 34 weeks of gestation.
 Explain the risk of recurrence in subsequent pregnancy. Therefore need for early booking
and prophylactic measures in next pregnancy.
NORMAL LABOUR
Diagnosis
 Painful uterine contractions after 22 weeks gestation;
 Pain associated with blood-stained mucus vaginal discharge (show);
 Watery vaginal discharge or a sudden gush of water.
 Cervical dilatation and effacement
253

Obstetrics andGynecology
Table 3. Stages of normal labour
Stages of Definition Duration
labour
First stage Cervical dilatation Nullipara Multipara
Latent phase < 3 cm 12h 8h
> 3 cm 6-8 h or rate of cervical 4-6 h or rate of cervical
Active phase dilatation 1 cm/h dilatation 1.5 cm/h
Second stage Full dilatation of cervix to 1 h 30 min
explusion of foetus
Third stage From expulsion of foetus 15 min 15 min
to the delivery of placenta
Management of labour
When thepatient reports to the hospital with labour pains, examination should be conducted
by a doctor on duty and risk category to be assigned (Table 4).
Table 4. Common risk factors during labour
Maternal Past reproductive Associated medical/
Present pregnancy
factors history surgical problem
Age < 16, >35 >1 abortion Bleeding in Heart disease
pregnancy
Parity-0, >5 Previous stillbirth Prematurity, PROM Diabetes
Obesity Previous caesarean Postmaturity Anaemia
section
Height < 145 cm Prev PPH/MRP PIH Jaundice
PIH, Eclampsia IUGR Hypertension
IUGR Multiple pregnancy Renal disease
Congenital anomaly in Malpresentation Thyroid disease
baby
Previous early neonatal Malposition Epilepsy
Death Asthma
General examination
 Record height and weight.
 Pulserate (PR), blood pressure (BP), respiratory rate (RR), temperature.
 Look for pallor, pedal oedema, jaundice and cyanosis.
 Auscultate cardiovascular and respiratory system.
Per abdomen examination
 Height of the uterus/POG.
 Presentation, attitude, palpable foetal head (rule of fifths).
 Foetal heart rate.
254

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Uterine contractions -+/-, intensity, duration and frequency per 10 minutes.
 Amount of liquor.
 Size of the baby/estimated baby weight.
 Look for overriding of foetal head over symphysis pubis.
 Features of obstructed labour and contour of the uterus.
Per vaginum examination
 Observe aseptic precautions -hand washing and sterile gloves. Note:
 Cervical dilatation and effacement.
 Presentation and station of presenting part.
 Position and degree of flexion (sutures and fontanelle).
 Status of membranes and if leaking present then colour of liquor.
 Cord prolapse or presentation to be ruled out.
 Pelvic adequacy and rule out cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD).
 Vaginal examination should be carried out atleast once every 4 hours during first
stage of labour and after rupture of membranes.
Investigations
 Minimum investigations required during labour are:
 Hb, urine albumin and sugar, blood grouping.
 Urine acetone in prolonged/obstructed labour.
ASSESSMENT OF PROGRESS OF LABOUR
 Measure changes in cervical effacement and dilatation during the latent phase
 Measure the rate of cervical dilatation and fetal descent during the active phase
 Assess further fetal descent during the second stage.
 Progress of the first stage of labour should be plotted on a partograph once the patient
enters the active phase of labour.
PARTOGRAPH
The WHO partograph has been modified to make it simpler and easier to use. The latent
phase has been removed and plotting on the partograph begins in the active phase when the
cervix is 4 cm dilated. Record the following on the partograph:
Patient information
 Name, gravida, para,
 Hospital number, date and time of admission,
 Time of ruptured membranes or time elapsed since rupture of membranes (if rupture
occurred before charting on the partograph began).
Fetal heart rate: Record every half hour.
Amniotic fluid: Record the colour of amniotic fluid at every vaginal examination:
 I: membranes intact;
 R: membranes ruptured;
255

Obstetrics andGynecology
 C: membranes ruptured, clear fluid;
 M: meconium-stained fluid;
 B: blood-stained fluid.
Moulding:
 1: sutures apposed;
 2: sutures overlapped but reducible;
 3: sutures overlapped and not reducible.
Cervical dilatation:Assessed at every vaginal examination and marked with a cross (X).
Begin plottingon the partograph at 4 cm.
Alert line: A line starts at 4 cm of cervical dilatation to the point of expected full dilatation at
the rate of 1 cm per hour.
Action line: Parallel and four hours to the right of the alert line.
Descent assessed by abdominal palpation: Refers to the part of the head (divided into five
parts) palpable above the symphysis pubis; recorded as a circle (O) at every abdominal
examination. At 0/5, the sinciput (S) is at the level of the symphysis pubis.
Hours:Refers to the time elapsed since onset of active phase of labour .
Time:Record actual time.
Contractions:Chart every half hour; count the number of contractions in a 10-minute time
period, and their duration in seconds.
 Less than 20 seconds:
 Between 20 and 40 seconds:
 More than 40 seconds:
Oxytocin: Record the amount of oxytocin per volume IV fluids in drops per minute every 30
minutes when used.
Drugs given: Record any additional drugs given.
Pulse:Record every 30 minutes and mark with a dot (!).
Blood pressure: Record every four hours and mark with arrows.
Temperature: Record every two hours.
Protein, acetone and volume: Record when urine is passed.
Partograph passes to the right of Alert line - reassess and consider criteria for referral; call
senior person, if available.
Partograph passes to the right of Action line - refer urgently to hospital unless birth is
imminent.
Drugs and IV fluids if administered are recorded.
Maintain intake-output chart
SECOND STAGE OF LABOUR
 Shift the patient to delivery table.
 Inform the paediatrician. Ensure all delivery equipment and supplies, including newborn
resuscitation equipment, are available, and place of delivery is clean and warm (25°C).
 Put her in dorsal/squatting position.
256

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Observe universal precautions
 Clean and drape the parts.
 Infiltrate the perineum with local anaesthetic agent if episiotomy is planned.
 Woman is encouraged to bear down.
 Episiotomy is given if required
 To control birth of the head, keep the baby's head flexed and gently support the perineum
as the head delivers. Suction of the nose and mouth.
 After external rotation, deliver the shoulders one at a time followed by rest of the foetus.
 Clamp and cut the umbilical cord.
 Ensure establishment of respiration in baby or institute resuscitation if required.
 Administration of oxytocin 5 Units IM at the delivery of the anterior shoulder to prevent
PPH.
THIRD STAGE OF LABOUR
 Recognize signs of placental separation: Uterus becomes globular and firmer, suprapubic
bulge appears, sudden gush of blood and permanent lengthening of cord.
 Deliver the placenta by controlled cord traction. As the placenta passes through the
introitus, care is taken to prevent the membranes from being torn off and left behind.
 Examine the placenta for its completeness and anomalies.
 Administer Inj. oxytocin 5-10 U IM.
 Active management of third stage should be done unless contraindicated.
 Examine the woman for any tears and repair if any. Stitch the episiotomy. Observe the
woman closely for one hour after delivery, record her PR and BP.
 Evaluate the uterus frequently, and inspect the perineum to detect excessive bleeding and
haematoma formation.
Transfer from labour room
 Observe for 2 hours
 Check the following before transfer: pulse rate, BP, uterus, bleeding pre vaginum, inspect
external genitalia for condition of stitches and any haematoma, passed urine.
Episiotomy (Incision of the perineum)
 Not to be performed routinely.
 Applied selectively for: breech, forceps or vacuum delivery, occiput posterior positions,
rigid perineum, scarred perineum, and shoulder dystocia.
 Clean the area with antiseptic solution.
 Infiltrate beneath the vaginal mucosa, beneath the skin and deeply into the perineal
muscle using 10 ml of 0.5 -1% lignocaine.
 Check at the incision site for effect of local anaesthetics by pinching with a forceps before
giving incision.
 Perform episiotomy at crowning. Place two fingers between the baby's head and the
perineum and cut 3-4 cm of perineum in mediolateral direction.
257

Obstetrics andGynecology
 After delivery of the baby and placenta, carefully examine for extensions of tears.
 Repair the episiotomy with vicryl rapide 2-0 suture (chromic catgut if vicryl is not
available). Close the vaginal mucosa with continuous suture starting 1 cm above the apex.
Perineal muscles are approximated using interrupted sutures. Skin is closed with
subcuticular (or interrupted) sutures.
Care of episiotomy
Perineal hygiene: Clean the area with antiseptic solution after urination and defaecation.
Analgesics are prescribed for allaying pain.
Respond to following problems during labour and delivery
Assess facilities and expertise available and appropriate timely referral if foetal heart rate <
120 or> 160 beats per minute, prolapsed cord, breech presentation, stuck shoulders, multiple
births
FETAL DISTRESS IN LABOR
Abnormal fetal heart rate (less than 100 or more than 180 beats per minute) with thick
meconium-stained amniotic fluid.
General management
 If a maternal cause is identified (e.g. maternal fever, drugs), initiate appropriate
management.
 If a maternal cause is not identified and the fetal heart rate remains abnormal throughout
at least three contractions, perform a vaginal examination to check for explanatory signs
of distress:
 If there is bleedingwith intermittent or constant pain, suspect abruptio placentae.
 If there are signs of infection (fever, foul-smelling vaginal discharge) give antibiotics as
for amnionitis.
 A normal fetal heart rate may slow during a contraction but usually recovers to normal as
soon as the uterus relaxes.
 A very slow fetal heart rate in the absence of contractions or persisting after contractions
is suggestive of fetal distress.
 A rapid fetal heart rate may be a response to maternal fever, drugs causing rapid maternal
heart rate (e.g. terbutaline or ritodrine), hypertension or amnionitis. In the absence of a
rapid maternal heart rate, a rapid fetal heart rate should be considered a sign of fetal
distress.
 If thecord is below the presenting part or in the vagina, manage as prolapsed cord .
 If fetal heart rate abnormalities persist or there are additional signs of distress (thick
meconium-stained fluid), plan delivery:
 If the cervix is fully dilated and the fetal head is not more than 1/5 above the symphysis
pubis or the leading bony edge of the fetal head is at 0 station, deliver by vacuum
extraction or forceps
258

Obstetrics andGynecology
 If the cervix is not fully dilated or the fetal head is more than 1/5 above the symphysis
pubis or the leading bony edge of the fetal head is above 0 station, deliver by caesarean
section
MECONIUMSTAINED LIQUOR
Meconium staining of amniotic fluid is seen frequently as the fetus matures and by itself is
not an indicator of fetal distress. A slight degree of meconium without fetal heart rate
abnormalities is a warning of the need for vigilance. Thick meconium suggests passage of
meconium in reduced amniotic fluid and may indicate the need for expedited delivery and
management of the neonatal upper airway at birth to prevent meconium aspiration. In breech
presentation, meconium is passed in labour because of compression of the fetal abdomen.
This is not a sign of distress unless it occurs in early labour
Management
 Prop up the woman or place her on her left side.
 Stop oxytocin if it is being administered.
 Give oxygen 4–6 L by mask or nasal cannulae.
Advice on postpartum care
 To always have someone near her for the first 24 hours to respond to any change in her
condition.
 Not to insert anything into the vagina.
 To have adequate rest and sleep.
 The importance of hand washing to prevent infection of the mother and her baby.
 To wash perineum daily and after faecal excretion.
 To avoid sexual intercourse until the perineal wound heals.
 Counsel for birth spacing and family planning (for details see section on contraception).
 Advise on routine postpartum care visits-within the first week, preferably within 2-3 days
and second visit after 4-6 weeks. Earlier if problems- fever, UTI, perineal infection,
hypertension, urinary incontinence, severe anaemia, postpartum blues, HIV positive.
Counsel on exclusive breastfeeding
 Babies should start breastfeeding within 1 hour of birth. The baby should not be given
any other food or drink before breastfeeding.
 Babies should be exclusively breastfed for the first 6 months of life.
 Breast milk contains exactly the nutrients a baby needs, is easily digested and protects the
baby against infection.
INDUCTION AND AUGMENTATION OF LABOUR
Induction of labour refers to stimulating the uterus to begin labour. While augmentation of
labour means stimulating the uterus during labour to increase the frequency, duration and
strength of contractions.
259

Obstetrics andGynecology
A good labour pattern is established when there are three contractions in 10 minutes, each
lasting more than 40 seconds. If the membranes are intact, it is recommended practice in both
induction and augmentation of labour to first perform artificial rupture of membranes (ARM).
In some cases, this is all that is needed to induce labour. Membrane rupture, whether
spontaneous or artificial, often sets off the following chain of events:
-Amniotic fluid is expelled;
-Uterine volume is decreased;
-Prostaglandins are produced, stimulating labour;
- Uterine contractions begin (if the woman is not in labour) or become stronger (if she is
already in labour).
Artificial rupture of membranes
 Note: In areas where HIV and/or hepatitis are highly prevalent, it is prudent to leave the
membranes intact for as long as possible to reduce perinatal transmission of HIV
 Monitor the fetal heart rate.
 Ask the woman to lie on her back with her legs bent, feet together and knees apart.
 Wearing sterile gloves, use one hand to examine the cervix and note the consistency,
position, effacement and dilatation.
 Use the other hand to insert an amniotic hook or a Kocher clamp into the vagina.
 Guide the clamp or hook towards the membranes along the fingers in the vagina.
 Place two fingers against the membranes and gently rupture the membranes with the
instrument in the other hand. Allow the amniotic fluid to drain slowly around the fingers.
 Note the colour of the fluid (clear, greenish, bloody). If thick meconium is present,
suspect fetal distress.
 After ARM, listen to the fetal heart rate during and after a contraction. If the fetal heart
rate is abnormal (less than 100 or more than 180 beats per minute), suspect fetal distress.
 If membranes have been ruptured for 18 hours, give prophylactic antibiotics to help
reduce Group B streptococcus infection in the neonate - penicillin G 2 million units IV; ,
or Inj. ampicillin 2 g IV, every six hours until delivery
 If good labour is not established one hour after ARM, begin oxytocin infusion
 If labour is induced because of severe maternal disease (e.g. sepsis or eclampsia), begin
oxytocin infusion at the same time as ARM.
Assessment of the cervix
 The success of induction of labour is related to the condition of the cervix at the start of
induction. To assess the condition of the cervix, a cervical exam is performed and a score
is assigned based on the criteria (Table5):
 If the cervix is favourable (has a score of 6 or more), labour is usually successfully
induced with oxytocin alone.
 If the cervix is unfavourable (has a score of 5 or less), ripen the cervix using
prostaglandins or a Foley catheter before induction.
260

Obstetrics andGynecology
Table5.Assessment of cervix for induction of labour
Rating Dilatation Length of Consistency Position Descent by
factor cervix station of head
0 Closed More than 4 Firm posterior -3
1 1-2 3-4 Average Mid -2 to-1
2 3-4 1-2 Soft Anterior 0+1
3 More than 5 Less than 1 Soft Anterior +2
Oxytocin
 Use oxytocin with great caution, as fetal distress can occur from hyperstimulation and,
rarely, uterine rupture can occur. Multiparous women are at higher risk for uterine
rupture.
 The effective dose of oxytocin varies greatly between women. Cautiously administer
oxytocin in IV fluids (dextrose or normal saline), gradually increasing the rate of infusion
until good labour is established (three contractions in 10 minutes, each lasting more than
40 seconds). Maintain this rate until delivery. The uterus should relax between
contractions.
 Monitor the woman’s pulse, blood pressure and contractions, and check the fetal heart
rate.
 When oxytocin infusion results in a good labour pattern, maintain the same rate until
delivery.
 Carefully observe women receiving oxytocin.
 Record the following on a partograph every 30 minutes rate of infusion of oxytocin.
 Look for fetal heart rate. Listen every 30 minutes, always immediately after contraction.
If the fetal heart rate is less than 100 beats per minute, stop the infusion and manage for
fetal distress.
 Infuse oxytocin 2.5 units in 500 mL of dextrose (or normal saline) at 10 drops per minute
in case of multigravida. In case of primigravida start with 5 unit oxytocin in 500 ml of
dextrose.
 Increase the infusion rate by 10 drops per minute every 30 minutes until a good
contraction pattern is established (three contractions in 10 minutes, each lasting more than
40 seconds).
 Maintain this rate until delivery is completed.
 If hyperstimulation occurs (any contraction lasts longer than 60 seconds) or if there are
more than four contractions in 10 minutes, stop the infusion and relax the uterus using
tocolytics:
- terbutaline 250 mcg IV slowly over five minutes or
- salbutamol 10 mg in 1 L IV fluids (normal saline or Ringer’s lactate) at 10 drops per
minute.
• If a good contraction pattern has not been established with the infusion rate at 60 drops per
minute:
261

Obstetrics andGynecology
- Increase the oxytocin concentration to 5 units in 500 ml of dextrose (or normal saline)
and adjust the infusion rate to 30 drops per minute (15 mIU per minute);
- In multigravida and in women with previous caesarean scars, induction has failed; deliver
by caesarean section.
Prostaglandins
Prostaglandins are highly effective in ripening the cervix during induction of labour.
 Monitor the woman’s pulse, blood pressure and contractions, and check the fetal heart
rate. Record findings on a partograph.
 Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) is available in several forms (3 mg pessary or 2–3 mg gel). The
prostaglandin is placed high in the posterior fornix of the vagina and may be repeated
after six hours if required.
 Discontinue use of prostaglandins and begin oxytocin infusion if: membranes rupture;,
cervical ripening has been achieved;, good labour has been established;, or 12 hours have
passed.
Misoprostol
 Use misoprostol to ripen the cervix only in highly selected situations such as severe pre-
eclampsia or eclampsia when the cervix is unfavourable and safe caesarean section is not
immediately available or the baby is too premature to survive; fetal death in-utero if the
woman has not gone into spontaneous labour after four weeks and platelets are
decreasing.
 Place misoprostol 25 mcg in the posterior fornix of the vagina. Repeat after six hours, if
required.
 If there is no response after two doses of 25 mcg, increase to 50 mcg every six hours;
 Do not use more than 50 mcg at a time and do not exceed four doses (200 mcg).
 Monitor uterine contractions and fetal heart rate of all women undergoing induction of
labour with prostaglandins.
Foley catheter (mechanical dilation)
The Foley catheter is an effective alternative to prostaglandins for cervical ripening and
labour induction. It should, however, be avoided in women with obvious cervicitis or
vaginitis.
 Gently insert a high-level disinfected or sterile speculum into the vagina.
 Hold the catheter with a high-level disinfected or sterile forceps and gently introduce it
through the cervix. Ensure that the inflatable bulb of the catheter is beyond the internal
os.
 Inflate the bulb with 30ml of water. Give traction to rest of the catheter and strap it with
the thigh. Leave the catheter in place until contractions begin, or for at least 12 hours.
 Deflate the bulb before removing the catheter and then proceed with oxytocin infusion to
augment induction of labour.
262

Obstetrics andGynecology
POSTPARTUMHAEMORRHAGE (PPH)
Postpartum haemorrhage is excessive blood loss from the genital tract after delivery of the
foetus exceeding 500 ml or affecting the general condition of the mother.
Salient features
 Primary PPH i.e. bleeding within 24 hours of delivery is commonly due to atonic uterus
(90% cases) or cervical/vaginal tears (traumatic PPH). It can also be due to occult uterine
inversion, rupture uterus or coagulation defect.
 Abnormal bleeding can also occur between 24 hours and 6 weeks of delivery (secondary
PPH) due to sepsis, retained placental bits, or placental polyp, choriocarcinoma.
 PPH requires prompt and effective management, failing which it may result in
complications like hypovolaemic shock, coagulation failure, renal failure, hepatic failure,
adult respiratory distress syndrome and may also result in maternal death.
• Monitor pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate and urine output. While resuscitative
measures are underway, a thorough clinical examination is made to ascertain the cause of
PPHand definitive treatment is planned accordingly.
Pharmacological treatment
IV fluids and blood replacement therapy
ATONIC PPH
Prevention
Identify risk factors and anticipate the problem.
Active management (oxytocin 5 units intramuscularly at the birth of anterior shoulder or after
delivery of placenta) should be done in all cases unless contraindicated.
Non pharmacological treatment
Placental removal with cord traction if already separated uterine massage and bimanual
compression.
Pharmacological treatment (Table6)
 Oxytocin infusion (10-40 units in 500 ml Ringer's lactate/normal saline at 125 ml/min)
 Methyl ergometrine maleate 0.2 mg IV may be repeated IM after 5-10 min. (Caution:
Contraindicated in heart disease, hypertension).
Table 6. Drugs used in the treatment of post partum haemorrhage
Drug Dose and Route Continuing Dose Maximum Dose Precautions and
Contraindications
Oxytocin IV: Infuse 20 IV: Infuse 20 Not more than 3 Do not give as an
units in 1 L IV units in 1 L IV L of IV fluids IV bolus
fluids at 60 fluids at 40 drops containing
drops per minute per minute oxytocin
IM: 5-10 units
Ergometrine/ IM or IV Repeat 0.2 mg Five doses (Total High blood
263

Obstetrics andGynecology
Methyl- (slowly): 0.2 mg IM after 15 1.0mg) pressure, pre-
Ergometrine minutes. If eclampsia, heart
required, give 0.2 disease
mg IM or IV
(slowly) every
four hours
15-Methyl IM: 0.25 mg 0.25 mg every 15 Eight doses Asthma
ProstaglandinF2 minutes (Total 2 mg)
 Prostaglandins should not be given intravenously. It may be fatal
 If bleeding is not controlled 15-methyl PGF2 0.25 mg IM intramyometrial, may be
A
repeated every 15-90 min up to a maximum of 2 mg. (Caution: Contraindicated in
bronchial asthma, epilepsy).
 In patients with bronchial asthma and epilepsy, administer with caution Tab. misopristol
600mcg per rectum.
Indication for referral
If patient is still bleeding despite medical therapy and if facilities for transfusion and further
management are not available arrange for transfer to a higher center. Intrauterine packing
may be done in the mean time.
Surgical treatment
 Retained placenta-Manual removal of placenta under general anaesthesia (GA)
 Cervical/ vaginal tears-Exploration and repair
 Rupture uterus-Laparotomy with repair/ hysterectomy
 Uterine inversion-Reposition under GA
 Atonic PPH not controlled-Laparotomy with uterine artery ligation with medical measures
 Internal artery ligation/Hysterectomy
Patient education
 Higher parity and previous atonic PPH predispose to PPH.
 Hospital delivery is mandatory in women with PPH in a previous pregnancy, grand
multipara, multiple pregnancy, APH and severe anaemia.
PREVENTION OF MATERNAL TO CHILD TRANSMISSION
Transmission rate during pregnancy 5-10%, during labor and delivery 10-15% and during
breastfeeding 5-20%.
Risk factors for vertical transmission
 Viral load >50000 RNA copies/ml at time of delivery
 CD4 count <700/cumm
 Chorioamnionitis
 Duration of ruptured membranes over 4 hrs doubles the risk
 Intrapartum haemorrhage
264

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Mode of delivery
 Invasive fetal monitoring
 Breastfeeding
Basic mechanism for mother to child transmission
 Transplacental
 Exposure to maternal blood and vaginal secretion at the time of delivery.
 Postnatal exposure to maternal secretions such as breast milk.
2006 guidelines recommended that only women with a low CD4 count should receive a
combination of HIV and AIDS drugs to prevent mother-to-child transmission and all HIV-
positive mothers were advised to exclusively breastfeed for 6 months and then rapidly wean
to avoid transmitting HIV to their infant.
New 2010 guidelines, recommended that all HIV-positive mothers, identified during
pregnancy, should receive a course of antiretroviral drugs to prevent mother-to-child
transmission. All infants born to HIV-positive mothers should also receive a course of
antiretroviral drugs and should be exclusively breastfed for 6 months and complementary fed
for up to a year.
Four key strategies for preventing mother-to-child transmission
1. Keeping women of reproductive age and their partners HIV-negative through
reproductive health and HIV prevention services.
2. Avoiding unwanted pregnancies among HIV-infected women and women at risk of HIV,
through family planning and HIV testing and counselling services.
3. Ensuring HIV testingof pregnant women and timely access to effective antiretroviral
therapy, both for the health of HIV-infected mothers and for PMTCT, during pregnancy,
delivery and breastfeeding.
4. Better integration of HIV care, treatment and support for HIV-infected women and their
families.
Following should be avoided
 Artificial rupture of membranes
 Routine use of fetal scalp electrodes for fetal monitoring
 Operative delivery with forceps or a vacuum extractor and/or episiotomy
CD4 count has to be done. If CD4 count less than or equal to 350 cells/mm3 start
antiretroviral drugs for their own health. CD4 count higher than 350 cells/mm3 – no need of
ART for mother’s health. But helps in preventing transmission.
Mothers, when identified in pregnancy as being HIV positive, should begin a triple
antiretroviral regimen immediately after being diagnosed, irrespective of their CD4 count.
Mothers should remain on the same triple antiretroviral regimen throughout pregnancy and
continuing for life.
265

Obstetrics andGynecology
Infants born to HIV positive mothers should receive a course of medication for PMTCT.
Under the infant should receive daily NVP or AZT from birth until age 4-6 weeks, regardless
of infant feeding method.
Three options for PMTCT (Table7):
Table7. Treatment options for prevention of mother to child transmission of HIV
Treatment Prophylaxis Infant recieves
(for CD4 count <350 ( for CD4 count >350
cells/mm3) cells/mm3)
Option A Triple ARVs starting as Antepartum:AZT Daily NVP from birth
soon asdiagnosed, starting asearly as 14 until 1week after
continued for life weeks gestation cessation of all
Intrapartum:at onset of breastfeeding; or, if not
labour breastfeeding or if
-single-dose NVP and mother isontreatment,
first doseof AZT/3TC through age4–6weeks
Postpartum:daily
AZT/3TCthrough 7
days postpartum
Option B Triple ARVs starting as Triple ARVs starting as Daily NVP or AZT
soon asdiagnosed, early as14 weeks from birththrough age
continued for life gestation and 4–6 weeks
continued intrapartum regardless of infant
andthrough childbirth if feeding method
notbreastfeeding or
until 1 weekafter
cessation of all
breastfeeding
Option B+ Triple ARVs starting as Triple ARVs starting as Daily NVP or AZT
soon asdiagnosed, soon asdiagnosed, from birththrough age
continued for life continued for life 4–6 weeks
regardless of infant
feedingmethod
AZT: Zidovudine, sd-NVP: Single-dose Nevirapine, NVP: Nevirapine,
AZT: Zidovudine, 3TC: Lamivudine
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
Reproductive tract infections (RTI), including sexually transmitted infections (STI), represent
a major public health problem. Syndromic management of symptomatic individuals is
recommended. NACO algorithm for the management of vaginal discharge (Figure 1, Table
8):
266

Obstetrics andGynecology
Figure 1. NACO algorithm for the management of vaginal discharge
Table 8. NACO algorithm for the management of vaginal discharge
There are seven pre-packed colour coded STI/RTI drug kits under NACP for syndromic
management of STI/RTI and procured by NACO. These drug kits have been developed based
on the National Guidelines on Prevention, Management and Control of Reproductive Tract
Infections including Sexually Transmitted Infections, Ministry of Health & FW, August
2007.Syndromic Case Management Protocol
Kit No. Syndrome Colour Contents
Kit 1 Cervicitis Grey T. Azithromycin 1 g (1) and
Urethral Discharge T. Cefixime 400 mg (1)
Presumptive treatment
Kit 2 Vaginitis Green T. Secnidazole 2g (1) and
T. Fluconazole 150 mg (1)
Kit 3 Genital Ulcer Disease–Non White Inj. Benzathine Penicillin 2.4 MU (1)
Herpetic and T.Azithromycin 1 g (1)
Kit 4 Genital Ulcer Disease–Non Blue T. Doxycycline 100 mg (30) and
Herpetic (for patients allergic to T. Azithromycin 1 g (1)
Penicillin)
Kit 5 Genital Ulcer Disease-Herpetic Red T. Acyclovir 400 mg (21)
Kit 6 Lower Abdominal Pain (PID) Yellow T. Cefixime 400 mg (1) and
T. Doxycycline 100 mg (28) and
T. Metronidazole 400 mg (28)
Kit 7 Inguinal Bubo Black T. Doxycycline 100 mg (42) and
T. Azithromycin 1 g (1)
267

Obstetrics andGynecology
PELVIC INFLAMMATORY DISEASE (PID)
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) results from infection of cervix, uterus, tubes, ovaries
and pelvic peritoneum. The disease may have acute or chronic presentation. The
commonest cause is sexually transmitted diseases, however, other causes include post
abortal and puerperal sepsis, operative procedures like dilatation and curettage, endometrial
biopsy, and insertion of intrauterine device.
Salient features
 Lower abdominal pain, cervical motion tenderness and adenexal tenderness, fever,
cervical discharge and leucocytosis.
 In severe cases patient may be toxic with high-grade fever, vomiting, dehydration,
and abdominal distension.
 Long term sequelae can be infertility, ectopic pregnancy, chronic pelvic pain.
 Failure of acute PID to resolve completely results in chronic PID with features of
severe, persistent and progressive pelvic pain, repeated acute exacerbation of PID,
tubo-ovarian inflammatory mass, dyspareunia or bilateral ureteral obstruction from
ligamentous cellulitis.
Investigations
 Haemogram with ESR, LFT, RFT, serum electrolytes, blood culture, endocervical
swab culture, ultrasonography if adenexal mass.
Treatment (Acute PID)
The patient can be treated as an outpatient or inpatient depending on the severity of clinical
features.
I. Outpatient treatment- mild PID
Either of the following two regimens can be given:
Regimen A
 Inj. cefoxitin 2 g IM, plus probenecid 1 g orally, as a single dose or Inj. ceftriaxone
250 mg IM as a single dose or Inj. ceftizoxime or cefotaxime 500 mg IM as a single
dose.
 Cap. doxycycline 100 mg 2 times a day for 14 days.
Regimen B
1. Tab. ofloxacin 400 mg oral 2 times a day for 4 days.
2. Tab. Clindamycin 450 mg oral 4 times a day for 14 days or Tab. metronidazole 400
mg 2 times a day for 14 days
Follow up after 2 - 3 days of initiation of therapy; patient is reevaluated for clinical
response. If poor response, patient is to be admitted for intravenous antibiotics.
II. Indoor treatment- severe illness or nausea and vomiting, HIV positive, unable to
follow or tolerate an outpatient regimen and outpatient therapy failed.
 Bed Rest. Hydrotherapy, if febrile.
 IV fluids in cases of vomiting and dehydration and correction of electrolyteimbalance.
268

Obstetrics andGynecology
Monitoring
Clinical condition, vital monitoring, signs and symptoms of pelvic abscess and peritonitis.
Either of the following regimens may be instituted at the earliest without waiting for culture
reports:
Regimen A
 Inj. cefoxitin 2 g IV every 6 hours orInj. cefotetan 2 g IV every 12 hours.
 Inj. doxycycline 100 mg IV or orally every 12 hours.
 Inj. metronidazole 500 mg IV 8 hourly.
Regimen B
 Inj. clindamycin 900 mg IV every 8 hours.
 Inj. gentamicin 2 mg/kg IV followed by 1.5 mg/kg every 8 hours.
 Inj. diclofenac sodium 75 mg deep IM 8 hourly or Inj. paracetamol 500 mg IM SOS.
 Inj. metronidazole 500 mg IV 8 hourly.
Injectable regimen should be continued for at least 48 hours after the patient demonstrates
clinical improvement (becomes afebrile, decrease in lower abdomen and pelvic tenderness,
improvement in constitutional symptoms). After this, doxycycline 100 mg 2 times a day
orally or clindamycin 450 mg oral 4 times a day should be continued for total of 14 days.
Clinical improvement should occur within 3 days of initiation of therapy. Consider further
diagnostic tests /laparoscopy if symptoms do not improve or worsen. Different procedures
may be required in the following situations:
 Colpotomy for drainage of midline pelvic abscess
 Dilatation and evacuation of septic products of conception in post abortal sepsis.
 Laparotomy in cases of pyoperitoneum, resistant peritonitis, intestinal obstruction,
ruptured tubo-ovarian abscess, enlarging pelvic mass despite medical therapy,
 Laparoscopy: if diagnosis is uncertain, no response to treatment, to reconfirm the
diagnosis, obtain cultures from cul de sac and fallopian tubes and drain pus if necessary.
Treatment of the sexual male partner
Asymptomatic male partner: Inj. ceftriaxone 125 mg IM followed by oral doxycycline 200
mg 2 times a day for 14 days.
Treatment (Chronic PID)
Treatment is surgical, considering pathological lesion, patient's age, and desire for child
bearing. Definitive surgery is total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy, but in young females conservative surgery is preferred. Chronic PID can be
due to pelvic tuberculosis.
Treatment (Pelvic tuberculosis)
Primary treatment is medical therapy with anti tubercular drugs for 6 months. Daily dose of
the drugs is:
 Tab. isoniazid 5 mg/kg (maximum 300 mg).
 Cap. rifampicin 10 mg/kg (maximum 600 mg).
269

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Tab. pyrazinamide 15-30 mg/kg (maximum 2 g).
 Cap. ethambutol 15-25 mg/kg (maximum 2.5 g).
All 4 drugs are given in the initial phase for 2 months followed by INH and rifampicin for
4 months.
Indications of surgery are: primary unresponsiveness, persistence or enlargement of
adenexal mass after 4 - 6 months of treatment, persistence or recurrence of pelvic pain on
treatment. Definitive surgery is total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy.
Patient education
 Emphasize behavioural and contraceptive methods to prevent the acquisition of STDs.
 Encourage to complete the antibiotic treatment for the full course i.e. 14 days.
 Sexual abstinence until complete treatment. Sexual partner of patient diagnosed with
PID must be treated to prevent reinfection.
PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is a cyclic recurrence of physical, psychological or
behavioural symptoms after ovulation and resolve after the onset of menstruation. It
requires treatment when the symptoms are severe to interfere with the woman's lifestyle,
relationships and occupational functioning.
Salient features
 Somatic symptoms include feeling of bloating, bodyaches, breast tenderness,
headache, food cravings and poor concentration.
 Emotional symptoms include emotional hypersensitivity, depression, irritability,
mood swings, anxiety, tension, fear of loss of control and confusion.
 Diagnosis is confirmed by excluding the concomitant medical or psychiatric
disorders with which it may be confused (depending on the symptoms).
Non- pharmacological treatment
Life-style advice should be offered to all women as first line of treatment.
1. Daily charting of symptoms for two months.
2. Dietary modifications like: increase complex carbohydrate meals, reduce or eliminate,
especially in the luteal phase - salts, chocolate, caffeine and alcohol; and several small
meals per day.
3. Moderate regular aerobic exercise like brisk walk 1-2 miles per day for 4-5days/week.
4. Stress management courses/counseling.
Pharmacological treatment
1. Tab. pyridoxine 100 mg/day for 10-14 days (during luteal phase) (maximum daily dose is
150 mg) or Tab. Evening primrose oil 500 mg 3 times a day.
2. NSAIDs like mefenamic acid 500 mg 3 times a day for premenstrual dysmenorrhea.
3. In case of predominantly physical symptoms (bloatedness, irritability swelling,
270

Obstetrics andGynecology
weight gain, breast tenderness), Tab. spironolactone 100 mg/day Or Tab. bromocriptine
1.25 - 5 mg/day in the luteal phase for mastalgia. (Common side effects are nausea and
vomiting. Tablet can be given vaginally if side effects are very severe.)
4. If no relief in symptoms with above measures in 2 - 3 cycles and symptoms are
predominantly emotional, then the following drugs are used preferably in consultation
with a psychiatrist: Tab. fluoxetine 5-20 mg/day
5. In non-responders to the above therapy, ovulation suppression may be beneficial; any
of the following can be used: Low dose combined oral contraceptive pills, 1 pill daily
from 5th to 25th day of the cycle.
DYSFUNCTIONAL UTERINE BLEEDING (DUB)
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding (DUB) is an abnormal uterine bleeding in the absence
of organic disease of the genital tract.
Salient features
 Disturbances of the menstrual cycle, regular and irregular uterine bleeding and
alteration in the amount or duration of the menstrual blood loss.
 Due to anovulatory cycles but can also occur in the ovulatory cycles. Anovulatory
cycles are usual in postmenarche, premenopausal age groups and are usually irregular,
variable in duration and amount of bleeding.
Treatment (Acute bleeding-first episode)
I. Severe bleeding (hemodynamically unstable patient)
 IV line, fluid replacement, blood transfusion, oxygen inhalation and monitoring of vitals.
 Dilatation and curettage to arrest bleeding except in cases of puberty menorrhagia where
medical management is preferred. IV tranexamic acid can be tried before resorting to
surgical intervention.
II. Less severe bleeding (haemodynamically stable patient)
 High dose progestogen: norethisterone 10 mg 3 times a day until bleeding stops (not >3
days) followed by norethisterone 5-10 mg or medroxyprogesterone acetate 10 mg per
day for 21 days. Withdrawal bleeding occurs after 2-4 days of stopping the drug and
stops in 4-5 days. Or combined oral contraceptive pills (OCs) containing 50 mcg
ethinyloestradiol 1 pill 2 times a day for 7 - 10 days followed by progestins for 7-10 days,
followed by withdrawal bleeding.
III.If bleeding is not controlled with progestogens
Patient is having heavy bleeding for many days, endometrial curettage yields minimal
tissue, or when the patient has been on progestogen medication (OC's or Depot MPA) and
the endometrium is shallow and atrophic.
Treatment schedules of high dose oestrogens, depending on the severity of the bleeding the
following can be used:
1. Conjugated oestrogen 25 mg IV every 4 h till bleeding abates or for 12 h. Progestin
271

Obstetrics andGynecology
treatment is started at the same time.
2. Oral treatment conjugated oestrogen 1.25 mg or 2 mg oestradiol valerate given
orally every 4 h for maximum of 24 h followed by single daily dose for 7-10 days.
All treatments must he followed by progestin coverage (10 mg MPA daily) along with
oestrogen for 7 days.
Monitoring
Clinical monitoring by vital charting and observation of blood loss per vaginum
Treatment (Chronic DUB - not actively bleeding)
 Iron therapy: elemental iron maximum 60 mg 3 times a day
 Histopathological diagnosis is must before starting hormonal therapy in all cases except
puberty menorrhagia.
I. Anovulatory DUB
 If contraception is desired: OCPs for 3 - 6 cycles or norethisterone 5-10 mg.
 Medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) 10 mg 16-25th day of the cycle for 3-6 cycles.
 In cases of endometrial hyperplasia without atypia on histology norethisterone acetate 5 mg
three times a day or MPA 10 mg twice a day 5-25th day of cycle for 3-9 cycles
followed by repeat endometrial biopsy.
 If fertility desired: ovulation induction is advised.
 Levonorgestrel IUD can be offered after counseling and is beneficial in DUB.
II. Ovulatory DUB
 NSAIDs: mefenamic acid 500 mg 3 times a day for 3 -5 days during periods. Or
 Oral combined contraceptive pills if contraception is desired.
If the above treatment is not effective in first cycle patient should be referred for
tertiary care. Following treatment can be considered as an alternative to surgery:
 Tab. danazol 200 mg daily for 3 months.
 Levonorgestrel IUCD can be offered after counseling and is beneficial in DUB.
Follow up
After 1, 3, 6 months of therapy. Treatment is stopped after 3-6 months. If symptoms
recur medical treatment is to be continued or surgery can be offered.
Surgical treatment - endometrial curettage
 Acute bleeding in haemodynamically unstable patient to quickly control the bleeding.
 In acute episode, if bleeding doesn't decrease significantly in 12-24 hours with
medical treatment, then reevaluation is mandatory and surgical curettage should be
done.
 If age is >35 years - premenstrual dilatation and curettage for endometrial histology is
a must to rule out endometrial pathology.
If medical therapy is not effective then endometrial ablation or hysterectomy is to be
performed.
272

Obstetrics andGynecology
Patient education
 Common side effects of high dose oestrogens are: nausea, vomiting, headache,
depression, and fluid retention. Contraindicated in liver disease, history of
thromboembolic disorder, cardiovascular disease, and oestrogen dependant neoplasm.
 Common side effects of progestogens are depression, fluid retention, fatigue, insomnia,
dizziness, nausea, and breast tenderness.
MENOPAUSE
Permanent cessation of menses for one year is known as menopause. The usual age is
between 40 to 50 years, mean age being 48 years. Long term consequences due to
decreased oestrogens can increase the risk of ischaemic heart disease due to adverse lipid
profile and pathological fractures due to osteoporosis.
Salient features
 Hot flushes, night sweats, palpitations, vaginal dryness, itching, atrophy of the
breast and skin, urethral syndrome, stress incontinence, mood changes like anxiety,
irritability, depression, insomnia and joint pains.
 Diagnosis is always clinical. However, in doubt, estimate serum FSH levels and
oestradiol levels may be helpful.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Balanced diet with fruits, vegetables, semi-skimmed milk adequate in vitamins and
minerals. A reduction or avoidance of smoking and alcohol consumption.
 Exercise: walking or swimming for 20-30 min every day.
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. calcium 1500 mg daily.
 Hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Rule out contraindications to HRT like
endometrial/breast cancer, acute phase myocardial infarction, undiagnosed breast
lump/abnormal vaginal bleeding and acute liver disease. Hypertension and diabetes if
present should be controlled before HRT is prescribed.
Oestrogen therapy
 For hysterectomized patients- conjugated equine oestrogen 0.625 -1.25 mg. or oestriol
1-2 mg is given daily 1-25th day every month or daily without any break. If symptoms
recur during drug free period then give continuous therapy. Or
 Transdermal oestradiol patch 50 or 100 mcg/day applied twice a week away from breast,
preferably on the shaved skin of buttock, thigh or legs (Limiting factor is local skin
reactions). Transdermal oestradiol patch is preferred in case of gall bladder disease,
hypertriglyceridimea, history of thromboembolism, poorly-controlled hypertension,
recent myocardial infarction, vascular diseases, migraine, chronic hepatic dysfunction,
malabsorption syndrome.
 Combined therapy with oestrogens and progestin in women with intact uterus.
273

Obstetrics andGynecology
i. Oestrogen therapy as above.
ii. Progestogen-medroxyprogesterone acetate 5 - 10 mg, or dihydrogesterone 10 - 20
mg or norethisterone 2.5 mg or 200 ml micronized progesterone is added from 13th to
25th days in cyclic sequential regimen and 1st to 12th of every month in continuous
sequential regimen.
If withdrawal bleeding is not acceptable then give continuous combined treatment (0.625 mg
conjugated equine oestrogen + 2.5 mg medroxyprogesterone acetate or 1 mg micronized
oestrogen + 100 mg micronized progesterone).
If conventional HRT is contraindicated
 Tab. Tibolone 2.5 mg per day (major side effects are weight gain, oedema, breast tenderness,
GIT symptoms and vaginal bleeding).
 In symptomatic elderly women with atrophic vaginitis and other urogenital symptoms who
do not desire long term HRT: Oestriol cream daily application of 0.5 g delivering 0.5 mg of
oestriol for 3 weeks followed by twice weekly application for 3 - 4 weeks.( Key indicator
of response to therapy is improvement in symptoms).
 Follow up at 2-3 months then at 6 monthly intervals. Yearly mammography, Pap's smear,
pelvic USG and serum oestradiol are advisable.
Short term treatment is advocated for acute symptoms and oestrogen use for long term
benefits is controversial.
Patient education
 Explain about the side effectsof estrogen andprogestogens
 Follow up visits at 2 - 3 months then at 6 monthly intervals are necessary.
POSTMENOPAUSAL BLEEDING
Postmenopausal bleeding (PMB) is bleeding that occurs after menopause has been established
for at least one year. It is different from infrequent, irregular periods that occur around the time
of menopause. Salient features
 Obese women and women taking hormone replacement therapy (HRT), vaginal atrophy,
lesions and cracks on the vulva may bleed. Bleeding from the upper reproductive system
can be caused by hormone replacements, endometrial cancer (5-10%), endometrial
polyps, cervical cancer, cervical lesions, uterine tumours, ovarian cancer or oestrogen
secreting tumors in other parts of the body.
 Diagnosis is confirmed by endometrial or cervical biopsy. Non-invasive tests include saline
infusion sonography (SIS), a refinement of vaginal probe ultrasound. Dilatation and
curettage (D &C) is often necessary for definitive diagnosis.
274

Obstetrics andGynecology
Treatment
Treatment of postmenopausal bleeding according to cause
Cause Treatment
Benign & malignant neoplasm of vulva Refer to higher center or treat cervix, vagina,
uterus or ovaries according to cause and
facilities available.
Indiscriminate use of oestrogen for HRT Stop oestrogen therapy
Infections Antibiotics
Injuries Repair
Coagulation disorder Treat accordingly
Endometritis Antibiotics
Postmenopausal atrophic vaginitis Vaginal oestrogen cream/ointment
Indication for referral to a higher level of care
Urgent referrals:
 Palpable pelvic mass or lesions suspicious of cancer on vulva or vagina or cervix on
examination or on ultrasound.
 More than one or a single heavy episode of PMB in women aged >55 years (not onHRT).
 Postcoital bleeding (PCB) in a woman aged >35 years that has persisted for more than 4
weeks.
 Prolonged or unexpected bleeding that persists for more than 4 weeks after stopping
HRT.
Early Referral (within 4-6 weeks)
Any other woman with PMB not on HRT who does not satisfy the criteria for `urgent
referral' of postmenopausal bleeding
 Unexplained repeated postcoital bleeding.
Note - in women over 45 years with persistent abdominal distension or pain, ovarian
cancer should be considered and therefore a pelvic examination should be performed. If
excessive bleeding, give hemostatic drugs (oral or intravenous) Postmenopausal bleeding
that is not due to cancer and cannot be controlled by any other treatment usually requires a
hysterectomy.
EARLY DETECTION OF CANCER
Screening for Breast Cancer (ACS Guidelines)
 Early detection of breast cancer in average risk women begins at 20 years and consist of a
combination of clinical breast examination (CBE), counseling to raise awareness of breast
symptoms and regular mammography beginning at age 40.
 Between 20 and 39 years, women should undergo clinical breast examination every 3
years. The average risk women should begin annual mammography at 40years and should
continue to be screened with mammography. Self examination of breast should also be
275

Obstetrics andGynecology
advised to every woman at 20 years.
 Self breast examination from the age of 20years
 Clinical examination once in 3 years by a physician
 Baseline mammogram from age of 40 years and once in 2 years afterwards
 Annual mammography from the age of 50 years
 In countries with limited resources, mammogram is available for diagnostic purposes not
for screening.
Screening for Cervical Cancer
 Screening for cervical cancer should be approximately 3 years after the onset of vaginal
intercourse, but not later than age of 21 years.
 Annual screening with conventional cytology smears or biennial screening using liquid
based cytology is recommended until the age of 30 years. At or after 30 years, a woman
who has had 3 consecutive, technically satisfying normal/negative cytology results may
undergo screening every 2 –3 years using conventional or liquidbased cytology.
 After 30 years of age, women who have the same history of normal cytology results may
undergo HPV DNA testing with conventional or liquid based cytology every 3
years. Average risk for women aged 70 years and older with an intact cervix may choose
to cease cervical cancer screening if they have no abnormal /positive cytology tests within
the 10 year period before the age of 70 years.
 Women who are immune-compromised by organ transplantation, chemotherapy or
corticosteroid treatment or HIV+ should be tested twice during the first year after
diagnosis and annually thereafter.
 Women with a history or absence of CIN 2/3 before as the indication for the
hysterectomy, should continue until there is a 10 year history of no abnormal positive
cytology tests.
 Every woman at 30 years should undergo Pap smear at least once as it helps in diagnosis
of early cervical cancer (ICMR guidelines).
Screening for cervical cancer
Age group- 3 years after sexual activity, not later than 21years. In countries with limited
resources all women around the age of 30 years should have one Pap test.
Method
 Pap smear (or) VIA (visual inspection after application of 5%acetic acid) in countries
with limited resources.
Precautions -Prior to a pap smear
 Not to douche for 48 hours, or use vaginal cream for 1 week, abstain from coitus for 24
hours, smear to be done on 7th day after menstrual period
Technique
 PAP TEST includes samples from ecto-cervix and endo-cervix
 Use bivalved speculum
276

Obstetrics andGynecology
 Place the endocervical brush or cotton tipped swab and roll it firmly against the canal
 Remove the endocervical brush or cotton tipped swab and place samples on the glass
slide
 Place the spatula against the cervix with the longer protrusion in the cervical canal
 Rotate the spatula 360° firmly against the cervix, scrape the entire transformation zone
 Place the sample immediately from the spatula onto the glass slide and fix it (spray
fixative or placing it in a bottle of fixative –95% ethanol.
Follow up -Abnormal smears should be referred for colposcopy and biopsy
Screening for Endometrial Cancer
Women at high risk due to known hereditary non polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC)
associated genetic mutation carrier status should consider beginning annual testing for early
endometrial cancer detection at an age of 35. The endometrial biopsy is still the most
common technique used to obtain endometrial tissue.
 Women at high risk (due to hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer carrier status) should
consider annual testing from the age of 35.
 Endometrial biopsy is the most common technique used to obtain endometrial tissue.
CONTRACEPTION
A method or a system, which allows intercourse and yet prevents conception, is called a
contraceptive method. This contraception may be temporary when the effect lasts only till the
couple uses the method but the fertility returns after the use is discontinued. The permanent
contraceptive methods are surgical and are aimed to achieve sterility after the surgical
procedure.
A couple in the reproductive age group, who desires contraception should be provided
information about all the available methods of contraception and should be counselled and
helped so as to choose a method most suitable for that couple. Various contraceptive
methods available are:
I. Temporary methods
1.Hormonal contraceptives
- Combined oral contraceptive pills.
- Injectable hormonal contraceptives (DMPA and NET-EN)
- Progesterone only pill [ketodesogestrel]
2. Non-hormonal contraceptive pills
- Centchroman.
3. Intrauterine contraceptive device
- CuT 200B.
- Multiload 250 and Multiload 375.
- CuT 380A
- LNG IUCD [mirena]
4. Barrier methods
277

Obstetrics andGynecology
- Male condoms.
- Vaginal diaphragms with spermicidal jelly.
- Contraceptive sponge.
II. Permanent methods
1. Female sterilization
- Postpartum sterilization.
- Interval ligation (laparoscopic or minilap ligation).
- Ligation concurrent with MTP.
2. Male sterilization
- Vasectomy (traditional or non scalpel).
TEMPORARY CONTRACEPTIVE METHODS
I. Hormonal contraceptives
(i) Combined oral contraceptive pills
Low dose combined oral contraceptive pill containing 30 mcg ethinyl oestradiol and a
progestin (0.3 mg Norgestrel or 0.15 mg Norgestrel or 0.15 mg Desogestrel) can be
prescribed. One tablet to be taken daily with meals at a consistent time. It should be started
during first seven days of the menstrual cycle or at any other time when it is reasonably
certain that she is not pregnant. If started after first 7 days of menstrual cycle, back up
method (abstinence or barrier method) should be used for 7 days. Pills should be taken for
three weeks followed by 1 week of pill-free interval during which placebo tablets are to be
taken if pack contains 28 tablets.
In women >40 years of age very low dose pills containing ethinyl oestradiol 20 mcg and
desogestrel 0.15 mg can be used. After age 50 years, if woman on oral pills, check FSH
during5 - 7 days of pill free interval. If FSH >30 IU/1 change to HRT regimens.
Contraindications
 Combined oral contraceptive pills are contraindicated in cases with current or history of,
thromboembolic disease, cerebrovascular disease, coronary artery disease, complicated
valvular heart disease, acute liver disease., current or past breast cancer., undiagnosed
vaginal bleeding, pregnancy, heavy smokers over 35 years of age, migraine with
neurological symptoms, diabetes >20 years or with vascular disease, current gall bladder
disease, uncontrolled hypertension (BP > 160/100).
 Combined oral contraceptive pills should not be taken during first 6 months postpartum if
breastfeeding and first 3 weeks postpartum in non-breastfeeding females. Pills can be
started immediately after spontaneous or induced abortion; can be used with caution in
cases with controlled hypertension, diabetes, migraine without neurological symptoms,
non-smokers with age more than 35 years of age without any other medical illness.
Follow up
First follow up should be within 3 months and then annually. Follow up involves history,
blood pressure, urinalysis, breast examination, liver palpation and pelvic examination.
278

Obstetrics andGynecology
Patient education
 Common side effects are nausea, vomiting, GI upset, breast changes, weight gain, acne,
breakthrough bleeding, amenorrhoea, rash, vaginal candidiasis. Side effects decrease
usually after 2 - 3 months of use.
 Report immediately in case of symptoms like chest pain, leg pain, severe headache,
severe stomachache, swelling of one or both legs, visual impairment.
 It is one of the most effective contraceptive methods with failure rate of about 0.1%.
 It has non-contraceptive health benefits like regular periods with less pain and bleeding,
improves premenstrual symptoms, and decreases functional ovarian cysts, pelvic
inflammatory disease, ovarian and endometrial cancer, endometriosis.
 Forgotten pill - if one pill is forgotten, take as soon as remembered and next day take next
pill and continue the schedule. Use back up method for 7 days.
 If 2 pills are forgotten take 2 pills and next day again take 2 pills, and then continue as per
schedule. Use back up method for 7 days.
 If 3 pills are forgotten, this cycle is not protected, use back up method till next cycle and
then restart with new pack.
 Should be discontinued at least 4 weeks prior to any planned major surgery.
 Medicines like rifampicin, barbiturates, phenytoin, carbamazepine, primidone,
griseofulvin interfere with the effects of oral pills. So use alternative method during their
intake.
(ii) Injectable hormonal contraceptives
Highly effective oestrogen free long acting contraceptive can be given when oestrogens are
contraindicated like sickle cell disease, seizure disorders, age >35 years who smoke;
breastfeeding females after first 6 weeks. In non-breastfeeding females, injections can be
safely given immediately postpartum.
Depot medroxy progesterone acetate - 150 mg injection to be given deep IM every three
months. Next injection can be delayed by 2 weeks Or Norethisterone enanthate - 200 mg
injection to be given deep IM every 2 months. Next injection can be delayed by 1 week.
Absolute contraindications
 Pregnancy
 Unexplained genital bleeding.
 Severe coagulation disorder.
 Previous sex steroid induced liver adenoma, active liver disease.
 Breast feeding during initial 6 weeks.
 Current or history of thromboembolic disease, cerebrovascular disease, coronary artery
disease.
 Current or past breast cancer
 Diabetes >20 years or with vascular disease
 Uncontrolled hypertension (BP > 180/110).
279

Obstetrics andGynecology
Patient education
 Common side effects are irregular bleeding, breast tenderness, weight gain, depression,
headache, dizziness, abdominal pain.
 Beneficial effects and efficacy is same as that of oral contraceptive pills.
 Fertility return is slightly delayed after discontinuation of use.
 Drug interactions are same as with oral hormonal pills.
II.Non-hormonal oral contraceptive pills (Centchroman) 30 mg tablet started on first day
of periods. Take twice weekly for three months and then continue as once weekly.
Contraindications
Polycystic ovarian disease, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia, severe allergy, recent history
of liver disease, and first 6 months of lactation
Patient education
 It is a non-steroidal contraceptive pill, has no hormonal effects with failure rate is 1-2%.
 Delayed periods can occur in 6% cases. If delay is >15 days, perform urine pregnancy
test.
 If one tablet is missed take as soon as possible and resume scheduled intake. Add back up
method till next period. If tablet missed for >7 days, start fresh regimen.
III. Intrauterine contraceptive devices (IUCD)
Any of the following devices can be inserted inside uterus by trained health personnel. It
should be inserted during or shortly after menstruation and after immediately after
spontaneous or induced abortion. After delivery it should be inserted during 4-8 weeks
postpartum. It can be inserted within 5 days of unprotected coitus. These devices need to
be changed after the duration of their lifespan.
Lifespan of intrauterine contraceptive devices (IUCD)
CuT 200B 3 yrs
Multiload 250 3 yrs
Multiload 375 5 yrs
CuT 380 A 10 yrs
Follow up - first follow up should be after next period to check for complications and to rule
out expulsion, after that follow up annually.
Contraindications
Pregnancy, postpartum <4 weeks, septic abortion, distorted uterine cavity, uterine fibroids,
current or within past 3 months PID or STD, increased risk of STD, HIV positive, AIDS,
pelvic tuberculosis, unexplained vaginal bleeding, trophoblastic disease, genital tract
malignancy, complicated valvular heart disease.
Patient education
 Common side effects are increased menstrual bleeding and dysmenorrhea. These decrease
after initial 2-3 months.
 No protection for STDs.
 Failure rates are 0.5 -3%. Ectopic pregnancy can still occur.
280

Obstetrics andGynecology
 IUCD may get spontaneously expelled. Therefore monthly palpation of IUCD string is
important. If not palpable, report immediately.
4. Barrier methods
These are cheap, available over the counter, coitus dependant methods. Male condoms,
vaginal diaphragm, spermicidal jellies, vaginal sponge can be used.
Male condoms
Any of the available condoms can be used. For each act of coitus a new condom is to be used.
If during intercourse, condom breaks or if there is spillage or leakage, woman should contact
a clinician within 72 hours and emergency contraception should be provided to her.
Contraindication-severe allergy to latex rubber.
Vaginal diaphragm
Available in different sizes. Proper size should be checked by a clinician by pelvic
examination. Can be inserted 6 hours prior to intercourse. About a tablespoonful of
spermicidal cream or jelly should be placed in the dome of diaphragm prior to insertion;
should be left in place for approximately 6 hours (but not >24 hours) after coitus. Additional
spermicide should be placed in vagina before each additional episode of sexual intercourse.
After removal wash with soap and water, rinse and dry.
Follow up. Annually to assess proper fitting of diaphragm.
Contraceptive sponge
Contains spermicidal agent Nonoxynol 9. It should be removed at least 6 hours after sexual
intercourse. Maximal wear time is 30 hours.
Patient education
 Barrier methods provide protection against STDs and PID. Only condom has been proven
to prevent HIV infection.
 Other advantages are prevention of diseases like pelvic inflammatory disease, carcinoma
cervix, chronic pelvic pain.
 It can be used soon after delivery.
 No hormonal side effects.
 Side effects like vaginal dryness, itching, irritation, allergic reactions can occur.
 Failure rates are very high. Typical failure rates are with condoms 14%, diaphragm with
spermicidal jelly 20%, highest with sponge 28%.
PERMANENT CONTRACEPTIVE METHODS
Permanent contraception is provided by sterilization operation in male or female partners.
 Male client should be <60 years of age.
 Female client should be >22 years and <45 years of age.
 Client must make informed decision voluntarily and must give consent on the consent
form for sterilization.
I. Female sterilization
Done by laparoscopic ligation in interval ligation and first trimester abortions or tubectomy.
281

Obstetrics andGynecology
Timing
 Interval sterilization -within 7 days after menstrual period is over.
 Postpartum sterilization - after delivery till 7 days but preferably within 48 hours. Later
on after 6 weeks postpartum.
 MTP -concurrently
 Spontaneous abortion - concurrently but under antibiotic cover and in the absence of
infection and anaemia.
Contraindications
There are no absolute contraindications. Relative contraindications are psychiatric disorder,
acute febrile illness, jaundice, Hb< 8 g%, chronic systemic disease, malignancy, bleeding
disorder, severe nutritional deficiency. Postpartum sterilization is contraindicated in
puerperial sepsis or fever, severe pre-eclampsia/eclampsia, premature rupture of membrane
>24 hours, severe APH or PPH, genital tract trauma.
Post abortal sterilization is contraindicated in sepsis, fever, haemorrhage, severe trauma,
uterine perforation, acute haematometra.
Follow-up
First follow up should be done seven days after the surgery for wound examination. Second
follow up is recommended after one month or next menstrual period whichever is earlier.
Subsequent follow-ups if client develops any complication or has query.
II. Male sterilization
Contraindications
There are no absolute contraindications. Relative contraindications include psychiatric and
physical illness, local genital conditions, including large varicocele, hydrocele, inguinal
hernia, filariasis, cryptorchidism, previous scrotal surgery, intra scrotal mass.
Follow-up. First follow up after 7 days of surgery for wound examination and stitch removal.
Second follow up after 3 months with semen analysis. Subsequent follow up required in cases
of any complication or queries.
Patient education
 In non scalpal vasectomy stitches are not required.
 It is a safe and simple procedure.
 It is a permanent method to prevent future pregnancies.
 It does not affect sexual pleasure, ability or performance.
 It has a small chance of failure even if performed under optimum circumstances.
 After vasectomy it is necessary to use a back up contraceptive method either for 20
ejaculations or for a period of 3 months.
 Sterilization does not provide protection against reproductive tract infections/ STDs or
HIV/AIDS.
 Failure rates with female sterilization are < 0.5% and male sterilization < 0.1 %.
282

Obstetrics andGynecology
Emergency contraception
Method used to prevent pregnancy after a likely fertile unprotected act of sexual intercourse;
can be used in cases of condom rupture, rape or other circumstances of unprotected sex.
First dose should be taken within 72 hours following unprotected sex and second dose 12
hours after the first dose. Any of the following can be used:
Levonorgestrel 0.75 mg 1 tablet 12 hourly for 2 doses. Or combined oral contraceptive pills
containing 50 meg ethinyl oestradiol with 0.5 mg norgestrel 2 tablets 12 hourly for 2 doses.
Or Low dose combined oral contraceptive pills containing 30 mcg ethinyl oestradiol with 0.3
mg norgestrel 4 tablets 12 hourly for 2 doses.
Patient education
• Side effects are nausea, vomiting, dizziness, fatigue, headache, lower abdominal pain,
breast tenderness, vaginal bleeding.
 It must be used under medical supervision.
 It decreases risk of pregnancy by 70 -90%. Earlier it is taken, success is more.
 If vomiting occurs within 2 hours of the dose, it must be repeated.
 There are no contraindications for emergency contraception.
 After this use a barrier method for each act of intercourse until next menstrual period.
 If period delayed >5 days, rule out pregnancy.
 Use regular contraceptive method.
283