Chapter 14
PSYCHIATRY DISORDERS
Introduction and General Guidelines
The incidence and prevalence of psychiatric disorders is on a rise in the 21st century. The
awareness, regarding the nature of mental illnesses and the need for treatment, and their
acceptance is also improving. Although psychopharmacology forms the backbone of
treatment in most psychiatric disorders, certain points need to be especially emphasized while
managing psychiatric patients:
1) The formation of a trusting, confidential, non-judgemental and empathetic doctor -patient
relationship is crucial to the practice of psychiatry.
2) Knowing the person as a whole rather than only his symptoms endorses patient
improvement.
3) The psychotic patient often loses his judgement and reality perception. Such patients
often have to be treated against their will.
4) Family has an important role in the causation and management of psychiatric disorders.
5) All patients do well with holistic treatment which includes psychopharmacology, other
biological treatments, psychotherapyandrehabilitation.
6) Psychiatric treatment often continues for a long period, so compliance is a major issue.
SCHIZOPHRENIA AND OTHER PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS
Schizophrenia is a chronic debilitating psychiatric disorder of varied and profoundly
disruptive psychopathology affecting cognition, perception, emotion and other aspects of
behavior. Its usual age of presentation is around 25 yrs and affects all social classes equally.
Salient features
 The common symptoms of schizophrenia are false, fixed, firm beliefs (delusion),
perceptual abnormalities e.g. hearing of voices while alone (hallucinations).
 Abnormalities in speech and behavior as irrelevant speech, talking to self, crying or
laughing for no reason are also prominent.
 schizophrenia has been divided into following subtypes for the ease of practice.
- Paranoid schizophrenia- Delusions and hallucinations form predominant features
along with other symptoms.
- Catatonic schizophrenia-Characterized by marked psychomotor retardation or
agitation.
- Hebephrenic schizophrenia-Characterized by marked abnormalities of behavior.
- Residual schizophrenia Simple schizophrenia
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Cognitive behaviorally oriented psychotherapy -understanding of illness, identification of
target symptoms, and development of strategies to cope up with these symptoms.
284

Psychiatry Disorders
 Rehabilitation of the patients in the form of supported employment, individualized job
development, ongoing job support, integration of vocational and mental health services.
 Social skills training, behavior based instructions, corrective feedback, and contingent
social reinforcement.
Pharmacological treatment
 Hospitalization is indicated in suicidal patients, non compliant patients, treatment
resistant cases and diagnostically difficult cases (Figure 1).
 Antipsychotics (typical and atypical) are the main treatment for such patients (Table 1).
 Co-administration of Tab. trihexyphenidyl (2 – 12 mg/day) is recommended with typical
antipsychotics.
 Benzodiazepines (Inj. lorazepam 2-4 mg, orally, IM or IV preparation) may be co-
administered in uncooperative patients initially.
 ECT (electro convulsive therapy) - electric shock of 100-120 volts may be given in
patients with associated suicidal intention and treatment resistant cases. It is given for 1-3
seconds under general anesthesia so that it produces short lasting generalized tonic clonic
convulsions.
285

Psychiatry Disorders
Table 1. Dosage schedule and adverse effects of commonly used antipsychotics
Drugs Effective dose Dosage schedule Adverse effect
Typical antipsychotics
Haloperidol 5–20 mg/day, Start with 5 mg twice a More extra-pyramidal side
available as tablets, day or 10 mg HS and effects viz slowness of
syrup, injection and increase the dose by movements, blunted facial
depot preparation 5mg if no response. expressions, tremors,
(50 mg/ampoule) Depot injection to be rigidity, excessive
given once two to three salivation, etc.
weeks. Non specific -sedation,
Trifluoperazine Available as 5mg Start with 5mg/ day and reduction in seizure
Tab. can be gradually threshold, orthostatic
titrated upto a hypotension,
maximum of 40 anticholinergic side effects
mg/day CVS -cardiac toxicity,
Fluphenazine Depot injection Once in 15-20 days sudden death,
decanoate 5 mg/2ml Hematological -leucopenia
Depot injection One ampoule IM once Endocrinal -
Zuclopenthixol 200mg/ml in 2-3 weeks. hyperprolactinemia
Sexual -anorgasmia and
decreased libido,
GIT -nausea, vomiting,
hepatotoxicity
Atypical antipsychotics
Risperidone 2-10 mg/day, Start with 2mg once a
available as tablets, day or twice a day and
syrup and depot titrate it to 8mg/day
preparation (25 gradually. Deport Less extra-pyramidal side
mg/ampoule) injection to be given effects
deep IM once every 15 Non specific -dizziness,
days hyperkinesias, somnolence,
Olanzapine 5–30 mg/day, Start with 5 mg once a anti-cholinergic side effects
available as tablets day or HS and titrate like dry mouth,
gradually by 5 mg/day constipation, delirium
if no improvement. GIT -nausea, vomiting.
Quetiapine Available as 50, Start with 50mg twice a Endocrinal -
100, 200 mg day and build upto 300- hyperprolactinemia,
tablets 800 mg/ per day hyperglycemia.
Hematological -leucopenia
Sexual -erectile
Clozapine 25–300 mg/ per Get complete blood dysfunction,
day, available as counts done before orgasmic dysfunction
tablets starting clozapine. General -weight gain
Start with 25 mg HS or
50mg HS gradually
titrate to 500mg.
286

Psychiatry Disorders
Figure 1. Treatment guidelines for schizophrenia
Patienteducation
 Both, the patient and the primary caregiver should be explained that although
schizophrenia is a chronic illness and requires long term treatment, it can be effectively
treated in most cases.
 Mild to moderate side effects may develop to medications, but usually tolerance develops
to them.
 Medicines should not be stopped abruptly.
 Family should be encouraged to take up the responsibility for regular treatment and
follow-up. Family interventions include illness education, crisis intervention, emotional
support andtraining for coping skills.
OTHER PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS
Schizophreniform disorder
 Clinical features similar to schizophrenia
 Differs from schizophrenia in that duration of symptoms is lesser than 6 months
 Pharmacological treatment is similar as schizophrenia
Brief psychotic disorder
 Clinical features similar to schizophrenia
 Differs from schizophrenia in that duration of symptoms is less than 1 month
 Pharmacological treatment is similar to schizophrenia
287

Psychiatry Disorders
Delusional disorder
 Clinical features - characterized by single or multiple non bizarre (false fixed but feasible
beliefs)delusions of 1 month duration
 Differs from schizophrenia in that duration of delusions is 1 month and functioning and
behavior in other areas of life than delusional one is intact
 Insight oriented psychotherapy forms mainstay of treatment whereas Pharmacological
treatment is similar to schizophrenia
Schizoaffective disorder
 Symptoms of schizophrenia are present continuously and features of bipolar affective
disorder overlap
 Differs from schizophrenia by prominence of affective features
 Pharmacological treatment is with antipsychotics and mood stabilizers as in schizophrenia
and bipolar disorder respectively
MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER
Major depressive disorder (MDD), more commonly known as depression, is one of the most
common psychiatric disorders with lifetime prevalence of about 10-20 %. Incidence in
females are almost twice that in males.
Salient features
 Common symptoms of depression are (for a minimum period of two weeks):
- Persistent sadness of mood and decreased interest in previously pleasurable activities
- More than 5 % weight loss or gain
- Sleep disturbance–insomnia or hypersomnia
- Marked slowing of activity or agitation and easy fatigability
- Lack of concentration
- Feelings of worthlessness, helplessness, hopelessness, guilt and suicidal thoughts /
attempts
- Anxiety symptoms often coexist
Investigations
 Diagnosis is based on history and mental state examination (MSE). Test for thyroid
function can be done to rule out the co morbidity.
 Investigations for associated neurological co-morbidities can be done particularly in
elderly patients presenting with depression
Non pharmacological treatment
 Psychological factors are very important in the causing, maintaining as well as
improving depression. For holistic management of depression, some form of
psychotherapy should be co-administered.
288

Psychiatry Disorders
 Psychodynamic approach aims at promoting personality change through understanding of
major conflicts, achieving insight into defenses, ego distortions, providing role model
permitting cathartic relief or aggression.
 Cognitive behavioral approach aims at providing symptomatic relief through alteration of
target thoughts, identifying cognitive distortions, modifying erroneous assumptions,
promoting self control over thinking patterns.
 Interpersonal approach aims at providing symptoms relief through solving current
interpersonal problems, reducing stress involving family and work, improving
interpersonal communication skills.
Supportive approach with techniques such as catharsis, realistic problem solving is also
useful.
Pharmacological treatment
 Hospitalization is needed in severely suicidal patients, treatment resistant cases and non
compliant patients.
 SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) are currently the drug of choice for
depression.
- Tab. fluoxetine - start with 20 mg/day increase to 40 mg/day, if no response in 4-6
weeks
- Tab. escitalopram - start with 10 mg/day depending on tolerability and gradually
increase upto 30mg/day
- Tab. sertraline - start with 25 mg/day or 50 mg/day depending on the severity of
symptoms in 1 HS dosage preferably and gradually increase to maximum of
300mg/day
 Tab. mirtazepine - start with 7.5 mg/day and gradually increase upto maximum 30
mg/day.
 Tricyclic antidepressants like Tab. imipramine for depression with somatic complaints.
Start with 25mg twice a day and gradually increase by 25 mg/day to maximum of 300
mg/day if no response (should be avoided in patients with heart disease, glaucoma,
benign prostatic enlargement and epilepsy).
 Antidepressant action takes about 2-3 weeks and needs to be continued for 6-9 months in
first episode and for longer period in recurrent depression.
 Initially benzodiazepines may need to be co-administered to manage insomnia and
anxiety.
 In cases of bipolar depression, there might be a sudden switch to mania in which case
anti-depressant should be withdrawn.
 ECT (Electroconvulsive therapy) is a very safe, effective and economical mode of
treatment and is indicated in severe depression with or without suicidal ideas, retarded
depression and resistant depression.
289

Psychiatry Disorders
Patient education
 Explain the nature of illness, consequences of untreated depression, suicidal risk, need for
adequate does for adequate duration and other supportive measures.
 The therapeutic response takes time to appear but side effects may appear earlier.
Common side effects of tricyclic antidepressants are dry mouth, constipation, postural
hypotension (giddiness), blurred vision, sweating, palpitation, tremors, delayed
micturition, sedation, etc.
 Common side effects of fluoxetine are agitation, headache, nausea or heartburn, tremors,
changes in sexual performance, blurred vision, dry mouth and loss of appetite.
BIPOLAR MOOD DISORDER
Bipolar mood disorders are characterized by episodes of mania and depression or mania
alone with intervening periods of normalcy.
Salient features
 In manic episode, an elevated, expansive or irritable mood is the hallmark. The
elevated mood is euphoric and characterized by euphoria, impaired judgement, denial
of illness, overtly religious, over familiar behavior, increased talkativeness, increased
self esteem, increased psychomotor activities and goal directed activities, increased
sexual driveand engaging into high risk behavior.
 Patients with depressed mood experience loss of energy and interest, feelings of guilt,
difficulty in concentrating, loss of appetite and thoughts of death or suicide.
 Other signs and symptoms of mood disorders include change in activity level,
cognitive abilities, speech and vegetative functions (e.g. sleep, appetite, sexual activity
and other biological rhythms).
 These disorders virtually always result in impaired interpersonal, social and
occupational aspects of life.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Psychoeducation, family therapy and rehabilitation for manic phases
 Psychotherapeutic measures same as in unipolar depression for depressive phases.
Pharmacological treatment (Figure 2, Table 2)
 Antipsychotics like risperidone and olanzapine are used as an adjuvant in treatment.
 Episode of depression is to be treated as in major depressive disorder but Tab.lamotrigine
25-100 mg is the treatment of choice.
 Prophylactic treatment: to be given to prevent recurrent episodes: Tab. lithium carbonate
900-1500 mg /day in divided doses or Tab. sodium valproate 600- 2000 mg /day in
divided doses or Tab. carbamazepine 600-1200 mg / day in divided doses
290

Psychiatry Disorders
Figure2. Management of current manic episode
Table 2. Dosage schedule of anti-manic drugs
Drug treatment of mania : recommended doses Dosage schedule
400 mg / per day. Adjusted after 3 – Start with 600 to 900 mg/day
Lithium 4 days according to plasma after getting baseline
levels investigations done
Start with 200mg thrice a day
As sodium valproate slow release: and gradually increase upto
Sodium valproate
Dose is 20 –30 mg/ kg/ day the per kg maximum dose if
no or less response
Has lesser side effect than
Oxcarbazepine 300mg, build upto 1500 mg
carbamazepine
Patient education
 Emphasize about recurrent course of illness and not to get too much worried regarding
recurrences.
 Relapses can be treated as successfully as the first episode.
 When on lithium, advice to take plenty of fluids especially during summer; not to restrict
salt.
291

Psychiatry Disorders
 If fever, vomiting or diarrhea develops while on lithium, reduce the dose of lithium to
half and contact the physician or the psychiatrist.
INSOMNIA
Insomnia is one of the commonest complaints in psychiatric, medical and general clinical
practice. Common causes include recent stress, psychiatric illnesses like depression and
anxiety disorders, pain or substance abuse.
Salient features
 Difficulty in initiating sleep, frequent awakenings from sleep, early morning insomnia or
non-restorative sleep.
 In the elderly, the physiological reduction in number of hours of sleep does not amount to
insomnia. If the patient is distressed by decreased sleep, treatment may be given to increase
the duration of sleep.
 Stressful situation leading to insomnia or the symptoms of the causative illness can be
elicited on careful enquiry.
 Duration of symptoms may vary from few days to many months or years depending on the
cause.
Non pharmacological treatment
Sleep hygiene
 Keep a regular time for going to bed and arising up; avoid day time naps.
 Limit daily in-bed time to the usual amount present before the sleep disturbance
 Avoid large meals near bedtime; eat at regular times daily. No stimulant medication or
food beverages (caffeine, nicotine, alcohol, etc.) especially in the evenings.
 Mild to moderate physical exercise in the morning.
 Avoid evening stimulation: substitute radio or relaxed reading for television.
 Practice meditation or progressive muscular relaxation.
 Maintain comfortable sleeping conditions.
Treat the underlying cause. In both primary insomnia (where no cause is identifiable) and
insomnia due to other causes, management includes introducing good sleep hygiene and
medications for short period, if required.
Pharmacological treatment
If still sleep is inadequate,
 Tab. nitrazepam 5-10 mg or Tab. clonazepam 1-2mg or Tab. zopiclone 7.5-15mg or Tab.
zolpidem 5-10 mg can be given for 2-6 weeks, ½ to 1 hr before bedtime.
 Patients must be cautioned regarding risk of dependence in diazepam and nitrazepam.
Patienteducation
Follow sleep hygiene instructions, look for tapering off benzodiazepines in 4-6 weeks
292

Psychiatry Disorders
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
Generalized and persistent anxiety that is not restricted to any particular situation or
environment is an essential feature of this condition. One year prevalence of GAD is 3 to 8%
and it is twice as common in women as men.
Salient features
 Generalized anxiety or excessive worries along with associated symptoms as shakiness,
restlessness, headaches
 Breathlessness, excessive sweating, palpitations and nausea, GI disturbance, sleep
disturbance, irritability, hypervigilance.
 Diagnosis is based on history and mental status examination
 Investigations for co-morbidities like hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, hypo
parathyroidism, pheochromocytoma and nutritional deficiencies should be done to rule
out organic causes of anxiety.
Non pharmacological treatment
3 main psycho-therapeutic approaches are used.
 Cognitive behavior therapy aims at finding out the cognitive distortions and altering
faulty coping strategies. Major techniques used are relaxation and biofeedback.
 Supportive therapy aims at offering reassurance and comfort to the patients.
 Insight orientated psychotherapy focuses on uncovering unconscious conflicts and
identifying ego strengths.
Pharmacological treatment
 Benzodiazepines are the drug of choice like diazepam (start from 5mg HS or 10 mg HS),
or Tab. clonazepam (start from 0.5 mg HS or TDS depending on the severity of
symptoms), or Tab.lorazepam (start from 2 mg HS increase upto 8 mg maximum).
 SSRIs like sertraline, escitalopram or paroxetine (start with Tab. paroxetine 10 mg or 20
mgper day upto maximum 50 mg/day) is effective in GAD.
 Beta blockers (Tab. propranolol 20 mg BD or sustained release preparation upto 80
mg/day in divided doses is used) is used for symptomatic relief.
Patient education
 It is a chronic disease though easily treatable, but treatment needs to be taken regularly
for a long time.
 Do not stop treatment without consulting your doctor.
 The drugs are quite safe and do not cause any serious side effects even if taken for a long
time.
293

Psychiatry Disorders
PANIC DISORDER
An acute intense attack of anxiety accompanied by feelings of impending doom is known as
panic disorder. Life time prevalence of panic disorder is 1 to 4%. Women are 2-3 times more
oflikely to be affected than men.
Salient features
 Recurrent panic attacks formed an essential feature of panic disorder. Panic attack is
characterized by intense fear or discomfort reaching a peak within 10 minutes.
Associated with palpitations, sweating, shaking, breathlessness, chest pain, nausea,
fainting, feeling of choking, fear of dying or going crazy.
 Persistence concern about having more attacks.
 Change in behavior related to attacks
 Worries about consequences of the attacks
Non-pharmacological treatment
Main approaches used are cognitive and behavioral therapies which aim at providing psycho
education and correcting cognitive distortions. It also includes educating the patient about
relaxation techniques and respiratorytraining.
 Family therapy includes providing psycho education and support
 Insight orientated psychotherapy is focused on helping patients to understand unconscious
meaning of anxiety and resolution of conflicts.
Pharmacological treatment
 SSRIs particularly paroxetine are effective in treating panic disorders. Other SSRIs like
escitalopram, citalopram, fluvoxamine and sertraline are also useful.
 Alprazolam is the most widely used benzodiazepine (start with 0.25 mg/day 1 HS upto
maximum of 6 mg/day). Theyare used for providing rapid symptomatic relief.
 Inj. lorazepam 2mg/ml and diazepam 5ml/ml can be used in patients presenting with
acute anxiety.
 Tri cyclic anti depressants like amitriptyline are also useful
Patient education
 General reassurance about benign nature of symptoms and possibility of spontaneous
recovery of individual
 Continuing with breathing exercises.
OBSESSIVE COMPULSIVE DISORDER (OCD)
It is characterized by recurrent irrational intrusive thoughts, images or impulses that are ego
dystonic i.e. distressing in nature. Life time prevalence in general population is 2-3%. Men
and women are equally affected by this disorder.
294

Psychiatry Disorders
Salient features
 Repetitive intrusive thoughts, images or impulses (obsessions) that creates anxiety and
mental and physical acts are done to relieve the anxiety (compulsions) are the presenting
features of this disorder.
 Commonly observed obsessions are
- Repetitive thoughts and fear of dirt and contamination or germs
- Fearthat something terrible will happen
- Forbidden or sexual thoughts and images or impulses.
 Commonly observed compulsions are excessive hand washing, bathing, checking, ordering
and arranging.
Non -pharmacological treatment
 Behavioral therapy is considered as treatment of choice for OCD. Principle approaches
used are exposure and response prevention. Other techniques used are desensitization,
thought stopping, flooding, implosion therapy and aversive conditioning.
 Psychotherapy in form of Cognitive Behavior Therapy (CBT), psychoanalytical and
psychodynamic therapies are also c+onsidered useful in the treatment.
 Resistant cases can also be treated by ECTs or surgeries.
Pharmacological treatment
 SSRIs like fluoxetine, fluoxamine, paroxetine (start with 10 mg gradually increase to
50mg/day), sertraline are agents of choice in treating OCD.
 Tab. clomipramine is start with 75mg sustained release preparation once daily and
depending on severity of symptoms gradually increase upto 300mg. It is the only
effective tricyclic anti-depressant used in treating OCD.
 Augmenting agents like sodium valproate, lithium or carbamazepine are added to enhance
the response to treatment.
 Benzodiazepines may be used as adjuvant treatment.
Patienteducation
 Reassure the patient that although disease is distressing and disabling, it is treatable.
 The drug takes about 2 weeks for its therapeutic response to manifest.
 Side effects may appear before the onset of therapeutic response. Common side effects of
clomipramine are dry mouth, constipation, postural hypotension (giddiness), blurred
vision, and sedation. Side effects of fluoxetine include gastrointestinal distress, nausea,
headache, nervousness, anorexia, restlessness and sexual side effects. Patient usually
adapts to these side effects with time.
 Advice the patient that treatment may continue for a long time. He/she should not leave
drugs without medical advice.
 In case of any untoward effects of drugs, he/she must immediately get in touch with his
clinician.
295

Psychiatry Disorders
 Patient must continue all his regular activities as far as possible.
 Yoga, meditation, physical exercises are useful measures along with drug therapy.
PHOBIC DISORDERS
Salient features
 Phobia is defined as excessive, irrational fear of specific object, circumstance or
situation. Social phobias are characterized by marked and persistent fear of social or
performance situations exposing a person to unfamiliar people or scrutiny by others.
Women are more likely to be affected by phobia than men.
 Examples of specific phobias are agoraphobia (fear of open spaces), claustrophobia
(fear of closed spaces), acrophobia (fear of heights), etc.
 Exposure to phobic stimulus provokes immediate anxiety sometimes leading to panic
attack. The patient is aware of the irrational nature of fears and avoids the anxiety
provoking stimulus.
 Causes marked distress in interpersonal, occupational and social areas of life.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Systematic desensitization is the most commonly used behavioral technique which
exposes patient to fearful stimulus in a serially graded manner. Imagined or actual
exposure to the phobic stimulus is given as long as the patient can tolerate.
 Insight orientated psycho therapy aims at enabling patients to understand the origin of
phobia, secondary gains and role of resistance and helps them to seek healthy ways of
coping with phobic stimuli.
 Hypnosis, supportive therapy and family therapyareuseful in treatment of phobias.
Pharmacological treatment
Following agents are used most commonly in treating phobias.
 SSRIs (e.g. Tab.paroxetine 12.5 -50 mg / day in divided doses)
 Benzodiazepines as mentioned above
Patient education
With regular treatment, most patients show improvement but treatment needs to be continued
for a long time, particularly in childhood onset phobias.
POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER (PTSD)
Exposure to a traumatic event consisting of either a direct personal experience or witnessing
an event involving threat of death, serious injury or serious harm can lead to post traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD)in 1.3 to 8% of victims.
296

Psychiatry Disorders
Salient features
Common examples of such traumatic events are physical or sexual abuse, domestic/community
violence, kidnapping, terrorist attacks, accidents or disasters like floods, hurricanes, etc. It is
characterized by a set of symptoms (for more than 1 month) such as:
 Re-experiencing–distressing recollections, flashbacks, imageries of the traumatic event
 Persistent avoidance – conscious effort to avoid places, situations, or events that will remind
the person of the traumatic event
 Hyperarousal – vivid dreams, night terrors, startling responses to even minor stimuli leading
to palpitations, sweating, tremors and other anxiety features
 Sense of detachment from usual social groups and situations, i.e. (emotional numbing is
seen)
 Sleep disturbance, checking for safety and exaggerated startled reactions are also present.
If these symptoms are present for less than 4 weeks it is called Acute Stress Disorder.
Non -pharmacological treatment
Focused Cognitive Behavior Therapy is aimed at giving psycho education to the patient
regarding the nature of typical emotional and physiological reactions to traumatic events and
PTSD. It also includes teaching techniques of muscle relaxation, focused breathing, affective
modulation, thought stopping and cognitive coping techniques to deal with the stress.
 Gradual exposure: The reminders of traumatic events are gradually introduced.
 Crisis Intervention/Psychological Debriefing: It consists of encouraging the patient to
describe the traumatic event in a supportive environment.
If the symptoms persist for more than a year, they do not improve after many years in one
third of patients; so early intervention and treatment is useful.
Pharmacological treatment
 SSRIs are the agents of choice for treating PTSD, the doses are same as in depression.
Propranolol has been used to treat PTSD symptomatically.
CONVERSION DISORDER
It is a type of somatoform disorder characterized by symptoms or deficits affecting voluntary
motor or sensory functions that is judged to be caused by psychological factors. Illness is
preceded by conflicts or stressful situations. It is twice more common in women than men
and is more commonly seen in lower socio economic strata of the society.
297

Psychiatry Disorders
Salient features
 Paralysis, blindness and mutism are most common symptoms.
 Parasthesias (altered sensations) and anaesthesias (loss of sensations) especially of the
extremities are also seen.
 Abnormal movements, gate disturbance, weakness and paralysis are possible motor
symptoms.
 Diagnosis is based on history and mental status examination. However conversion
episodes should be differentiated from seizures. Seizures are characterized by
repetitive, involuntary jerky movements or episodes of unresponsiveness associated
with tongue bite, frothing, injuries, fecal or urinary incontinence and amnesia (memory
loss) during episodes. Seizures can also occur during sleep and when patient is alone.
Absence of the above features is suggestive of conversion disorder. EEG and other
investigations can be used to rule out organic cause.
Pharmacological treatment
 Spontaneous resolution of symptoms occurs but insight orientated, supportive or
behavioral therapies can facilitate the same.
 Hypnosis, psychodynamic and psychoanalytical approaches can also be useful.
 Benzodiazepines are used as an adjuvant therapy.
 SSRIs can be used if co morbid depression is present.
DISSOCIATIVE DISORDERS
Dissociative disorders are characterized by disruption of integrated functions of
consciousness like memory, identityand perception of environment which can be dissociative
amnesia, dissociative fugue or dissociative identity disorder
Dissociative amnesia
 Characterized by disturbances in the ability to recall important personal information,
usually traumatic in nature.
 The memory loss is too extensive to be explained by simple forgetfulness. The
disturbances cause socio occupational impairment.
Dissociative fugue
 The disturbance is characterized by sudden, unexpected travel away from home or
customary places of work etc with inability to recall the past events along with partial or
complete assumption of new identity. It causes significant socio occupational impairment.
Dissociative identity disorder
 Presence of two or more personality or identities each with its own pattern of reacting to
the environment.
 These personalities take control of person’s behavior and often are accompanied by
inability to recall personal information.
298

Psychiatry Disorders
Treatment
 Psychotherapeutic interventions like psychoanalytic psychotherapy, cognitive
psychotherapy, behavioral therapy and hypnotherapy are the mainstay of treatment.
 Pharmacological treatment-antidepressants and antipsychotics have been used with
limited benefits.
ALCOHOL USE DISORDER
Alcohol use disorder is a common lethal condition that often masquerades as other
psychiatric syndromes. At any time, one of three men are drinkers, with a ratio of persisting
alcohol intake of approximately 1.3 men to 1.0 women.
Salient features
 Dependence is characterized by compulsion to drink, tolerance, intoxication,
withdrawal andpersistence of drinking inspite of overtly harmful consequences.
 Alcohol intoxication is characterized by recent intake of alcohol and behavioral changes
like slurred speech, unsteady gait, incoordination, nystagmus, impairment in attention
and memory, etc. In extreme cases it can lead to stupor and coma.
 Simple alcohol withdrawal is characterized by abrupt cessation of heavy intake of
alcohol and development of symptoms like sweating, palpitations, tremors, nausea,
vomiting, insomnia, transient visual/tactile/auditory hallucinations and psychomotor
agitation.
 Withdrawal may be complicated in the form of seizures, delirium tremens, etc.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Motivation enhancing, individual, group and family therapy
Pharmacological treatment
 Hospitalization is advised to most patients for smooth detoxification and to avoid or
manage withdrawal complications including seizures and delirium tremens as well as
medical co-morbidities.
 Tab. chlordiazepoxide start from 25mg TDS and may be increased upto 100 mg/day, used
only if liver function tests are normal or
 Tab. lorazepam startingfrom 2 mgTDS increased upto 8 mg is used, preferred when liver
functions are compromised or not known.
 Tab. thiamine supplementation to prevent and treat vitamin deficiency (start from 75 mg
BD and can be increased upto 300 mg/day)
 Injectable vitamins can beused when signs of severe vitamin deficiency are present.
 Once the patient is stable, the dose should be gradually tapered off (20% per day) over a
period of 10 to 14 days.
299

Psychiatry Disorders
 Fluid and electrolyte disturbance should be corrected especially if there is vomiting or
fever.
 Seizures – Rum fits (appearing within 24 hours of abstinence) can be treated with Inj.
diazepam 10 mg or lorazepam 2 mg IV stat especially when seizures are repeated.
Prophylactic treatment is not recommended for true alcohol withdrawal fits.
 Delirium tremens –The patient should be preferably treated in an intensive care unit.
 An intravenous line should be started immediately and thiamine 100 mg IV should be
administered. Thiamine along with multivitamin should be continued parenterally till
normal diet is resumed.
 IV dextrose and saline should be given at a rate adequate to replace fluid losses and
maintain blood pressure.
 Hyperthermia should be managed with cold sponge. Tab. paracetamol 500 mg orally 4
times a day may be used in absence of any hepatic dysfunction.
 Inj. diazepam 10 mg should be given slowly IV and should be repeated every 15-20
minutes till sedation is achieved.
 Physical restraint may be necessary if the patient is combative.
 Associated medical and surgical problems should be simultaneously investigated and
treated appropriately.
 Tab. disulfiram (250mg to 500mg daily) is used for relapse prevention. Informed consent
for treatment with disulfiram is mandatory before administering it.
 Information about the disulfiram reaction and the potential lethality of the same is
explained.
Patient education
Education regarding short-term and long term complications (medical, psychological, social,
legal,etc.) of substance use.
OPIOID USE DISORDERS
Opioid use disorders consist of physiological, behavioral, cognitive symptoms which indicate
repeated continued use of opioid drugs despite the problems related to it.
Salient features
 Opioid intoxication is characterized by recent opioid intake and development of symptoms as
initial euphoria, later dysphoria, apathy, psychomotor agitation or retardation, impaired
judgement, pupillary constrictions with drowsiness, slurred speech, impairment in attention
and memory.
 There usually is impaired social or occupational functioning.
 Opioid withdrawal is characterized by cessation of heavy prolonged use of opioid and
development of symptoms as dysphoric mood, lacrimation, nausea vomiting, muscle aches,
diarrhoea, yawning, fever, insomnia, pupillary dilatation, piloerection, sweating.
300

Psychiatry Disorders
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Individual counseling, family support and encouraging the patient to join the self help
groups are also important to help him maintain long-term abstinence.
 However opiate dependence is a highly relapsing disorder, and prolonged inpatient stay in
settings that also provide rehabilitative inputs is usually beneficial.
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. paracetamol 500 mg and dextropropoxyphen 32.5 mg - start from BD dosage and
gradually increase to 2 tablets TDS.
 Tab. buprenorphine 2 mg and naloxone 0.5 mg – start from 1 tablet BD to maximum of
TDS or QID dosages depending on the severity of withdrawal symptoms.
 Tab. clonidine 50 mcg BD is given for symptomatic management of withdrawal. Careful
monitoring of BP is needed.
 NSAIDs are given for muscular pains.
Long term (to be treated by a psychiatrist)
 Tab. naltrexone 50 mg/day orally is used to reduce craving and thereby to help patient
maintain long-term abstinence (who have remained opioid free for at least 7-10 days).
 Baseline hepatic functions should be assessed, and to be monitored once a month while
on naltrexone treatment.
 The drug is usually continued for a period of 6 months, however, it may have to be
withdrawn in presence of significant liver disease (i.e. several fold increase in the serum
levels of transaminases).
Patient education
Patient should be told about nature of illness, course and treatment modalities available
through individual sessions.
CANNABIS USE DISORDERS
Salient features
It is characterized with repetitive andcompulsive consumption of ganja, charas, etc.
 Recent intake of cannabis followed by development of symptoms as impaired motor co
ordination, euphoria, anxiety, slowed perception of time, impaired judgement, social
withdrawal, conjunctival congestion, increased appetite, dry mouth, tachycardia etc.
 Chronic dependence can lead to apathy.
 Mild cannabis withdrawal is characterized by restlessness, craving for cannabis and
dysphoria. Only symptomatic treatment is given for cannabis withdrawal.
Pharmacological treatment
Symptomatic treatment for nausea, insomnia and anxietymay be given
Non-pharmacological treatment
Motivation enhancing counseling, individual, family & group counseling
301

Psychiatry Disorders
AUTISTIC DISORDER
It is characterized by qualitative impairment in social interactions, impairment in
communications and restricted, repetitive and stereotypical patterns of behavior. Its
prevalence is 0.08% and is 4 -5 times more common in boys than girls.
Salient features
 Behavioral characteristics include lower intelligence, lack of social smile, poor eye
contact, low level of attachment to caregivers and extreme anxiety when their routine
is disturbed.
 There is a notable deficit in interactions with peer group, delay in development of
spoken language, repetitive movements like hand or finger flapping, rocking body
movements and head banging.
 Diagnosis is based on delayed history and clinical mental status examination (MSE).
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Educational and behavioral interventions are the treatment of choice.
 Structured classroom training in combination with behavioral methods is the most
effective treatment for many autistic children.
 Behavioral therapies to reinforce socially acceptable behaviors and encourage self care
skills.
 Training of parents with regards to the concepts and skills of behavioral modification has
proved beneficial.
 Language development is added to facilitate communication.
Pharmacological treatment
 No medication has proven its efficacy in treatment of core symptoms of autism but
symptomatic treatment for hyperactivity, obsessions, compulsions, aggression and self
injurious behavior can be given by using escitalopram, methylphenidate, haloperidol,
risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine. Lithium can be used in self injurious behaviors.
 Guidelines for Tab. risperidone prescribing with autism spectrum disorders in children
and adolescents are as follows:
- Initiating dose at 0.25 mg per day for patients less than 20 kg and 0.5 mg per day for
patients weighing20 kg or more.
- On day 4, the dose may be increased by 0.25 mg for patients being less than 20 kg or
moreand by 0.5 mg for patients above 20 kg.
- Assess the response after 2 weeks.
ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER
It is characterized by a pattern of diminished sustained attention and higher levels of
impulsivity in a child or adolescent than expected for someone of that age and developmental
level. Age of onset is before 7 years. Incidence of ADHD is 2 to 20%. It is 2-9 times more
common in boys.
302

Psychiatry Disorders
Salient features
 Common symptoms include careless mistakes in school work, lack of concentration,
inability to follow simple instructions, difficulty in organizing tasks and activities, easily
distractible by external stimulus.
 Hyperactivity is seen as fidgety hands or feet, frequently leaving seat in classroom, running
or climbing excessively in inappropriate situations, talking excessively and blurts out before
questions arecompleted
 Diagnosis is based on through case history and Mental Status Examination (MSE).
Non-pharmacological treatment
Social skills training, behavioral therapy and group therapy for patient and families are
considered beneficial.
Pharmacological treatment
 Drug of choice is Tab. methylphenidate 5-20mg.
 Other agents are atomoxetine, bupropion, venlafaxine, clonidine, guanfacine.
MENTAL RETARDATION
It is characterized by deficits in cognitive abilities and in behaviors required for social and
personal sufficiency also known as adaptive functioning. An assessment of social adaptation
as well as Intelligence Quotient (IQ) is necessary to determine the level of mental retardation.
Point prevalence of mental retardation is 1-3% of population. It is 1.5 times more common
among men than among women.
Classification of mentally retardation
According to the degrees of severity, mental retardation has been classified into four groups:
 Mild Mental Retardation –(IQ Range 50–70)
These people can live independently with adequate support and raise their own families.
They can obtain academic skills approximately upto sixth grade.
 ModerateMental Retardation –(IQ Range 35 –50)
These people can acquire language and can communicate adequately during early
childhood.
They are academically challenged and are unable to go beyond second to third academic
level.
As adults they are able to perform semi-skilled work under appropriate supervision.
 Severe Mental Retardation (IQ Range 20 –35)
These people may fail to develop communication skills in childhood but can learn to
count and recognize words critical to functioning. In adulthood, they may adapt well to
supervise living situations and may be able to perform work related tasks under
supervision.
 Profound Mental Retardation (IQ Range Below 20)
303

Psychiatry Disorders
They can be taught some self-care skills and can learn to communicate their needs if they
are given appropriate training.
Investigations
 Detailed history, standardized intellectual assessment and assessment of adaptive
functions in needed for diagnosing mental retardation.
 Examination of physical signs and neurological abnormalities is always necessary to
search for organic causes of MR.
 Laboratory tests – tests like chromosomal analysis, urine and blood testing for metabolic
disorder and neuroimaging are done for ascertaining the cause.
Non-pharmacological treatment
No treatment measures are available except for those to control behavioural symptoms.
Preventive measures form an important strategy.
 Primary prevention
It is aimed at implementing measures such as to increase the knowledge and awareness
about MR, to ensure and upgrade public health policies and laws to provide optimal
health care to mother and child, to eradicate known disorders associated with CNS
damage, etc.
 Secondary and tertiary prevention
- It is aimed at treating the associated disorder if any to shorten the course of illness
(secondary prevention) and to minimize the sequelae or consequent disabilities
(tertiary prevention).
- Specialized educational programmes addressing the training & adaptive skills, social
skills and vocation should be developed to improve quality of life.
- Group therapyhas also been successful.
- Behaviour therapy to reinforce desired behaviours and to reduce objectionable
behaviours is considered useful.
- Cognitive therapies like dispelling false beliefs and relaxation exercises have been
recommended.
- Psychodynamic therapy has been used with patients and families to decrease conflicts
about unrealistic expectations.
 Family Education
Educating the family and providing them counseling and supportive help is an important
aspect of management of MR.
 Social Intervention
It is aimed at improving the quantity and quality of social competence of people with MR.
Pharmacological treatment
 Methylphenidate is used successfully for patients of MR with Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder.
 Antiepileptic agents like sodium valproate and carbamazepine are used for controlling
aggressive and self-injurious behaviour.
304

Psychiatry Disorders
 Antidepressants are used to treat comorbid depression and antipsychotics like haloperidol,
chlorpromazine are used for reducing stereotyped movements.
 Beta-blockers like propranolol are used to control explosive rages or anger outbursts.
 Development of special schools, supportive groups and NGOs form an essential part of
supportive strategies for people with MR.
SUICIDAL PATIENT
Patients with suicidal ideation need immediate psychiatric intervention. Suicidal ideation can
occur in the background of depression, schizophrenia, adjustment disorders and alcohol and
other psychoactive substance abuse. About two thirds of all depressed patients contemplate
suicide, and 10 to 15 percent commit suicide.
Assessment of suicidal risk can be done with the help of specific questions
Whether the patient often feels sad?
Whether the patient has lost all hopes in life?
Thoughts that it is better to be dead than to face the constant miseries of life.
Thoughts of causing death to self (suicide plans)
Risk factors for predicting the risk of suicide
 Male sex, age above 45 years in men and above 55 years in women
 Suicidal attempt in past
 Presence of psychiatric illness especially schizophrenia and depression, substance abuse
or dependence
 Recent bereavement, social isolation, family history of suicide, unemployment
 Physical illnesses like malignancy, chronic pain, epilepsy, AIDS and recent will.
Non pharmacological treatment
Treatment is specifically directed at the cause, if identifiable. The patient should be referred
to a psychiatrist immediately after ensuring the following steps:
 Patient should not be left alone and be kept under constant observation.
 Family should be explained the seriousness of the problem and actively included in
management.
 Patient should be offered psychological support and reassurance and not criticized.
 No dangerous or potentially dangerous objects such as knife, blade, sharp edged objects,
rope, medication supply, etc. should be available in immediate vicinity of the patient.
 Specific treatment for depression, psychotic disorder or whatever may be the cause
should immediately be started.
Patient education
Family should be advised to follow a supportive approach towards the patient and should not
criticize. Suicidal attempt is indicative of distress and needs treatment of the causative illness.
305

Psychiatry Disorders
PSYCHOTROPIC DRUGS IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
A. Recommendations for use of psychotropic drugs in renal impairment
Drug groups Recommended drugs
Antipsychotics Haloperidol, olanzapine
Antidepressants Citalopram, sertraline
Mood stabilizers Valproate, carbamazepine, lamotrigine
Anxiolytics and hypnotics Lorazepam, zopiclone
B. Recommendations for use of psychotropic drugs in hepatic impairment
Drug groups Recommended drugs
Antipsychotics Haloperidol, sulpiride/amisulpiride
Antidepressants Imipramine, paroxetine, citalopram
Mood stabilizers Lithium
Anxiolytics and hypnotics Lorazepam, oxazepam, temazepam, zopiclone
C. Recommendations for use of psychotropic drugs in pregnancy
Drug groups Recommended drugs
Antipsychotics Chlorpromazine, haloperidol, trifluperazine
Antidepressants Nortriptyline, amitriptyline, fluoxetine
Mood stabilizers Consider using anti-psychotics
Anxiolytics and hypnotics Non pharmacological measures preferred
D. Recommendations for use of psychotropic drugs during breast feeding
Drug groups Recommended drugs
Antipsychotics Sulpiride, olanzapine
Antidepressants Sertraline, paroxetine, imipramine, nortriptyline
Mood stabilizers Consider using anti-psychotics
Anxiolytics and hypnotics Lorazepam, zolpidem
306

Psychiatry Disorders
MANAGEMENT OF WANDERING MENTALLY ILL PATIENT OR A MENTALLY
ILL PATIENT WITH NO FAMILY MEMBER OR ATTENDANT
 Mental Health Act, 1987 has provision for hospitalization of the mentally ill patients in
mental hospital.
 If one happens to come across a psychiatric patient wandering aimlessly or indulging in
socially disorganized behavior in a public place, one can approach the local police station.
 The in charge of the local police station under whose jurisdiction the place lies, has a duty
under the Act to take the patient to the concerned Metropolitan Magistrate (in
metropolitan cities) or the Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate
or any Magistrate of first class (in other cities). The Magistrate can issue a reception order
for admission of the patient to a mental hospital after getting him examined by a medical
officer.
 Admission to mental hospital can also be made on the request of the patient, if the patient
is willing to consent (voluntary admission) or on the request of family members, if they
so desire (admission under special circumstances).
PERSONALITY DISORDERS
A pervasive and enduring pattern of behavior, which begins in early adulthood and which
gives colour to person’s attitude behavior is known as personality. Behavioral patterns that
deviate from person’s sociocultural background areknown as personality disorders.
Clusters of personality disorders
 Cluster A -schizoid, schizotypal, paranoid
 Cluster B-borderline, histrionic, narcissistic, antisocial
 Cluster C -avoidant dependent personality, obsessive compulsive personality disorders.
Treatment of personality disorders is difficult. Psychotherapies and pharmacological
treatment for symptomatic management can be used with restricted benefits.
307