Chapter 15
ORTHOPEDIC CONDITIONS
OSTEOARTHRITIS
Osteoarthritis (OA) of the knee is an end result of the degeneration of articular cartilage.
Salient features
.
 Pain, stiffness after rest, difficulty in climbing stairs, difficulty in getting up from
squatting position, grating sensations and off and on episodes of flare and swelling.
 Erythema and palpable warmth are possible but rare. Genu -varum deformity and/or
fixed flexion contracture in severe cases.
 Classical radiological triad - joint space narrowing, peripheral osteophyte formation
and subchondral sclerosis
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Weight reduction (if overweight); cold fomentation for acutely swollen knee, however,
hot fomentation may give symptomatic relief to some chronic patients.
 Supervised non-traumatic muscle conditioning and rehabilitation regimens e.g. isometric
quadriceps strengthening exercise (all vigorous exercises to be avoided in acutely
swollen/painful knee).
 Compressive bandage or crepe bandage for effusion.
 Assistive devices like cane (to be held in the hand contralateral to more painful side),
walker for patients with severe deformities or unsteady gait.
 Brace for various instability helps while walking.
Pharmacological treatment
 Topical applications- containing salicylates, capsaicin, nicotinates, menthol, camphor,
NSAlDs in various combinations may provide symptomatic relief. (Caution: Avoid hot
fomentation immediately after topical applications). Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) for pharmacological pain palliation. The choice of NSAID depends upon
dosing convenience, physician and patients comfort, price and the past experience on its
frequency and severity of side effects as all are equipotent in full therapeutic dose (Avoid
intra-articular or oral steroids). Commonly used NSAlDs for OA knee
i. Acute painful situation/moderate pain (for initial 7-14 days), preferably take
NSAIDs after meals.
- Tab.paracetamol 500 mg 4-6 hourly(maximum daily dose 4000 mg)
- Tab. ibuprofen 400 -600 mg 2 or 3 times a day (maximum daily dose 3200 mg)
- Tab. diclofenac sodium 50 mg 3 times a day or 75 mg 2 times a day (maximum
daily dose 200 mg)
- Tab. aspirin 350 mg 2 tablets 4-6 hourly (maximum daily dose 5000 mg).
For mild to moderate pain/chronic pain control (for 3-6 weeks and then SOS)
308

Orthopedic Conditions
- All above medicines in reduced frequency of dosages. Or
- Tab.diclofenac sodium 100 mg/75 mg sustained release once a day. Or
- Tab.piroxicam 20 mgonce a day.
 All patients do not uniformly respond to a particular NSAID. It is not unusual for several
different NSAIDs to be tried before a suitably effective and well-tolerated agent is
identified for a particular patient.
 Caution: NSAIDs may cause dose related gastric irritation, nausea, vomiting and
dyspepsia; GI ulceration, perforation and haemorrhage and sometime renal toxicity.
However, one-third remains asymptomatic. NSAIDs can interfere with antihypertensive
therapy due to salt and water retention)
 In case of epigastric burning or nausea or vomiting either discontinue and switch over to
safer NSAID or administer Cap. omeprazole 20 mg half an hour before breakfast, in
patients on prolonged therapy with NSAIDs monitor haemoglobin, stool for occult blood
as these drugs may also cause leucopenia, thrombocytopenia and agranulocytosis.
 Refer the patient to an orthopaedic surgeon in case of persistent swelling, presence of
constitutional symptoms or mechanical symptoms like locking or frequent giving away
sensations. Surgical intervention may be required for severe deformities, contractures and
advanced disease with intractable pain, severe enough to affect independent performance
of activities of daily living, for prolonged periods.
Patient education
 There is no curative pharmacological agent for osteoarthritis knee and the disease is
irreversible. Non-pharmacological treatment has a major role to play in treatment
 Take minimal possible medication that provide symptomatic relief and to wait for 1-2
weeks for drug to show its effect.Topical applications do not penetrate into the joint
through skin directly.
 Intra-articular steroid injections give only temporary relief and risks of repeated intra-
articular injections far outweigh its advantages.
 To avoid activities which exacerbate pain like sitting cross legged or squatting on floor.
 To use ramp instead of stairs wherever feasible.Not to do vigorous exercises with acutely
inflamed knee.
 To report back if recurrent effusions in knee or systemic symptoms. Former may be
caused by mechanical disorder along with OA knee like loose body or meniscal tear.
Later situation could be caused by diseases of knee other than OA
References
1. Acetabular Bone Destruction Related to Non Steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs. Lancet 1985; 2:11-14.
2. Osteoarthritis. In: Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine. Rasper DL, Braunwald E, Fauci AS et al
(eds), 16th Edition, 2005, McGraw Hill Company Inc., New York, pp 2036-2047.
3. Osteoarthritis. In: Conn's Current Therapy, Robert E Rakel (ed), 1999, WB Saunders Company,
Philedelphia.
309

Orthopedic Conditions
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by persistent inflammatory synovitis (usually
involving small and large peripheral joints in symmetrical fashion) causing cartilage
destruction and bone erosion leading to changes in joint integrity.
Salient features
 The revised criterion of American College of Rheumatology (1987) aids in diagnosis and
classification. Suspect rheumatoid arthritis if:
> 3 swollen joints
>30 minutes of morning stiffness and involvement of metacarpophalangeal or
metatarsophalangeal joints,symmetric arthritis, rheumatoid nodule
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Since the etiology of RA is unknown, therapy remains empirical and palliative, aimed at
relieving the signs and symptoms of the disease.
 In acute pain rest and splint. Otherwise exercises directed at maintaining muscle strength
and joint mobility without exacerbating joint inflammation. A variety of orthotic (splints)
and assistive devices (cane, walker) can be helpful in supporting and aligning deformed
joints to reduce pain and improve function.
Pharmacological treatment
 In acute inflammation any of the NSAIDs as given in section on osteoarthritis may be
given except paracetamol. The anti-inflammatory action of the NSAIDs may take 2-4
weeks to become evident. Evaluation of persistent polyarthritis.
 Reduced NSAID dosages have to be used in the elderly and in patients with impaired
renal function. Concomitant use of more than one NSAID only increases toxicity, and has
no additional benefit. Patient not responding to one NSAID may still show a good
response to another.
 Topical applications-containing salicylates, capsaicin, nicotinates, menthol, camphor and
NSAIDs in various combinations may provide symptomatic relief.
 Refer to a specialist (physician) at a higher centre. Begin disease modifying antirheumatic
drugs (DMARD) early in the disease. Prediction of response to a particular DMARD is
not possible. It takes 4-6 weeks to show its effect.
 Tab. methotrexate 7.5 mg to 15 mg every week. Concomitant Tab. folic acid 1
mg/day reduces side effects.
Caution: Nausea, mouth sores, liver damage, increases in incidence of chest infection,
macrocytic anaemia. Regular monitoring of LFT is required. Avoid alcohol during
therapy
 For patients with severe disease, affecting activities of daily living and
not responding to adequate trial of NSAIDs and DMARD for sufficient
duration consider following treatment,
310

Orthopedic Conditions
 Tab. prednisolone 40-60 mg/day for 2-4 weeks. Review periodically and possibly taper
down slowly. If required for a longer duration administer at doses of 5-10 mg/day
 Intra-articular corticosteroids: methylprednisolone acetate, 20-80 mg may be needed in
selected cases with predominantly monoarticular arthritis of a large joint.
 Refer the patient to a higher centre if no response to medical therapy after
4-8 weeks, severe extra-articular symptoms, deformities or contractures
present, patient is crippled/or not able to carry out activities of daily living
despite adequate medical treatment.
Surgical treatment
Synovectomy in patients with predominantly monoarticular involvement, not responding to
conservative therapy, might be helpful. Reconstructive surgery is indicated for disorganized
joints.
Patient education
 The disease can be controlled but no curative agent is known. There can be remissions
and exacerbations.
 At the onset of disease it is difficult to predict the natural history of an individual patient's
illness. No characteristic features of patients have emerged that predict responsiveness to
a particular DMARD.
 Life style modification may be required depending on the degree of disability.
 Regular mild exercises as prescribed by the doctor helps in prevention of deformity
maintain range of motion of the joints and muscle strength.
 Magic drug for rheumatic arthritis might contain steroids. Better to consult a qualified
doctor before taking it.
References
1.Rheumatoid Arthritis. In: Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine. Kasper DL, Braunwald E, Fauci AS et al
(eds), 16th Edition, 2005, McGraw Hill CompanyInc., New York, pp 1968-1977
2. Rheumatoid Arthritis. In: Conn's Current Therapy. Robert E. Rakel (ed), 1999, WB Saunders Company,
Philadelphia.
CERVICAL AND LUMBAR SPONDYLOSIS
It is a clinical syndrome resulting from degeneration of intervertebral discs and facet joints.
Salient features
 Pain and stiffness with decreased range of movement of gradual onset. Occasional acute
flare ups of pain with muscle spasm. Neck pain may radiate to occiput, scapular area and
down to one or both arms (may be associated with paraesthesias).
 Back pain is usually diffuse and may radiate up to knees through back of thighs.
 Radiological narrowing of one or more intervertebral spaces, spur formation (osteophytes)
and subchondral sclerosis are the hallmark.
311

Orthopedic Conditions
Non-pharmacological treatment
 In acute painful situation rest, moist heat in cold weather and light massage (improves
tone, circulation and elasticity) to paraspinal muscles. Cervical traction in the position of
maximum comfort to neck (5-10 pounds) for 10-15 minutes. Ultrasonic exposure on
painful trigger points in cervical and shoulder muscles. Inter ferential therapy (IFT) for
acute neck and back pain. Removable soft cervical collar/back corset/ back belt for
symptomatic relief.
(Caution: No exercises in acute painful situation).
 In chronic pain mobilization and strengthening exercises, moist heat and cervical traction.
Pharmacological treatment
Same as described for osteoarthritis of knee.
Patient education
 In cervical spondylosis avoid prolonged desk work, if must, then intermittent rest is
required and proper writing, typing, sitting posture (avoid low table, use tilt table) and
care of the neck.
 In lumbar spondylosis explain the patient how to manage weight since extra weight puts
greater stress on the back muscles and to maintain proper body alignment while standing
with feet slightly apart. When standing for long periods, use a small stool to keep one foot
up with knee bent. Do not tense up or concentrate on standing up straight, just stand
naturally. Try to avoid carrying heavy bags on shoulders.
 Care of back while sitting by using well designed fully adjustable chair to provide plenty
of support to the lower back. If chair is uncomfortable use a rolled up towel or small
pillow to support the back. When sitting for long periods rest your feet on low stool and
use arm rests to support weight of your body. Try not to sit in the same position for long
periods. If prolonged sitting is must take rest for a minute or two every hour.
 To lift weight cautiously by keeping the back as much upright (vertical) and straight (not
hunched over) as one can. Not to bend over at waist to pick up the object, instead squat,
get under or next to object not on top of it. Lift with your leg muscles rather than back or
abdominal muscles. Hold the object close to your body while lifting and carrying and do
not twist your body.
 To sleep safely on a firm bed. While sleeping supine legs should be supported with
pillows. Not to sleep on your stomach. Sleeping on your side with knees bent and hips
tilted forward is probably the best.
 Refer to a higher centre in case of severe pain that disturbs sleep/not responding to
conservative treatment for more than 2 weeks/associated with severe restriction of neck or
back movements or torticollis or sciatic pain or constitutional symptoms/neurological
symptoms with back or neck pain.
312

Orthopedic Conditions
SPRAINS
An injury to a ligament(s), by sudden unnatural or excessive movement of a joint, is termed
is a sprain. Symptoms are pain, swelling, discolouration of the skin, especiallybruising and
impaired joint function.
Salient features
 Mild or grade I sprains- partial tearing of ligament fibers, minimal swelling and no joint
instability.
 Moderate or grade II sprains -pain, oedema, ecchymosis, joint tenderness with some loss
of joint motion but no joint instability.
 Severe or grade III sprains- gross instability of the joint with complete tearing of all
fibers, marked swelling and severe pain.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Check sensation and circulation distal to the injury. Obtain X-rays of the involved region
to rule out a fracture. Stress X-rays may show abnormal opening of the joint in a grade III
sprain.
 Protection, support and rest.
 Restrict the movement of the affected area.
 Apply cold compresses immediately (this will help to reduce swelling).
 Avoid using ice directlyon the skin.
 Elevation of the limb above the level of the heart- especially at night while sleeping.
 In a grade I sprain, apply a compression bandage for a period of 5-7 days, patient may be
allowed to bear weight after a week.
 In a grade II sprain, splintage (slab later on converted to cast) may be used to restrict joint
motion, but the patient has to remain non-weight bearing for 4-6 weeks.
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. ibuprofen 400 mg 3 times a day for 5-7 days. Or Tab. diclofenac sodium 50 mg 3
times a day for 5-7 days.
Patient education
 Don't massage or hot fomentation in acute stage; it will increase the swelling.
 To give rest to the injured area until the pain subsides (usually 7 to 10 days for mild
sprains and 3 to 5 weeks for severe sprains).Avoid activities that cause pain or swelling.
Practice moderation in physical activities. If the pain and swelling decreases within 48
hours after a sprain, move the affected joint in all directions. To avoid high heeled shoes
(for ankle sprains).
Reference
1.Apley's System of Orthopaedics and Fractures, 6th edition, 1982, Butterworths and Co. London.
313

Orthopedic Conditions
ACUTE PYOGENIC OSTEOMYELITIS
Acute osteomyelitis is acute infection of the bone, commonly seen in children less than 10
years of age.
Salient features
Diagnosis considered if any of the following two criteria are present,
 Classic symptom of localized pain, fever (with or without chills and rigours), swelling in
the metaphyseal area, warmth, and limited range of motion of the adjacent joint; pus
aspirated from the bone; positive bone or blood culture for pyogenic organism;
radiographic changes typical of acute osteomyelitis (soft tissue swelling, periosteal
reaction, lytic areas in the metaphysis).
 The X-ray changes usually appear 7-10 days after the onset of illness.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Rest, splintage to the part, elevation of the limb and sponging for fever. If aspiration is
positive for pus, drain the pus (must be performed by an orthopaedic surgeon) and send
for culture and sensitivity for antibiotics.
 Postoperative duration of splintage depends upon extent of damage to the bone. Usual
duration is 4-6 weeks. Gradually mobilize the limb and permit gradual weight bearing
thereafter. In case of extensive destruction, bone might require support for a few months.
Pharmacological treatment
Broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics are started depending upon most likely organism
present. Commonest bacterial pathogen is Staphylococcus aureus (40-80% of cases). The
antibiotic later on may be changed depending upon culture report or response to therapy.
Intravenous administration of antibiotics is continued till favorable clinical response is
achieved, followed by oral antibiotics. Total duration of antibiotic(s) administration ranges
from 4-6 weeks.
 Inj. cloxacillin 50-100 mg/kg/day in four divided doses for 1-2 weeks.
 Inj. gentamicin 5-7.5 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses for 1-2 weeks Or Inj. amikacin 15
mg/kg/day in 2-3 divided doses if resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Or
 Inj. ceftriaxone 100 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses for 1-2 weeks (maximum dose 2 g/day)
or
 Inj. cefotaxime 100-200 mg/kg/day by IV infusion or IM or IV in 2-4 divided doses for 1-
2 weeks. Or
 If patient is hypersensitive to penicillins and cephalosporins, Inj. clindamycin 40
mg/kg/day in 4 divided doses for 1-2 weeks. Or
 If Methicillin resistant Staph, aureus suspected, Inj. vancomycin by IV infusion 500 mg
over at least 60 minutes every 6 hours or 1 g over at least 100 minutes every 12 hours;
Neonates upto 1 week 15 mg/kg initially then 10 mg/kg every 12 hours; Infants 1-4
weeks 15 mg/kg initially then 10 mg/kg every 8 hours; Children over 1 month 10 mg/kg
314

Orthopedic Conditions
every6hours. Alternatively linezolid can be given in appropriate dose.
 Oral Tab.paracetamol 500 mg for fever.
 Monitor therapy by clinical response. Favourable response characterized by decrease in
swelling and fever, improvement in general well being and movements of limb, fall in
ESR and C-Reactive protein (better indicator than ESR because CRP closely follows the
clinical response). After 7-10 days of symptoms, repeat the X-ray to assess the extent of
destruction and damage to bone. Oral therapy usually started 1-2 weeks of IV antibiotic
therapy, if response is favourable.
 The choice of oral antibiotic largely depends on culture and sensitivity report. In the
absence of culture report give oral: Syr./Cap. cloxacillin 50-100 mg kg day in 4 divided
doses for 3-4 weeks. Or Syr./Cap. cephalexin 25-50 mg/kg/day in 4 divided doses for 3-4
weeks. Or
 Refer the patient to an orthopaedic surgeon if aspiration yields pus from bone or acute
osteomyelitis suspected in an adult/diabetic/haemodialysis patient/IV drug user/ patient
with orthopaedic implant/immunocompromised host.
Patient education
 Antibiotic therapy may be required for a few weeks depending upon the response. Plaster
(or any other splintage) might be required for prolonged periods. Not to make the child
walk (in case of lower limb bone involvement) unless permitted.
References
1. A Comparative Study of Osteomyelitis and Purulent Arthritis with Special Reference to Aetiology and
Recovery. Infection, 1984; 12: 75.
2. Osteomyelitis and Suppurative Arthritis. In: Nelson's Textbook of Paediatrics. Berhman, Kliegman, Jenson
et al (eds), 17th Edition, 2004, W.B. Saundcr Company, Philadelphia, pp 2297-2302.
3. Bone and Joint Sepsis. In: Lovell and Winter's Paediatric Orthopaedics. Morissy RT, Weinstein SL (eds),
Vol. 4, 1996, Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
ACUTE SEPTIC ARTHRITIS
It is inflammation of joint caused by pyogenic microorganisms, usually seen in children <10
years. Hip and knee are the commonest joints to be affected.
Salient features
 Inability to move theaffected joint, refusal to walk or limp, hip pain referred to knee
acute local signs of inflammation (warm and painful joint with effusion) and clinical
signs of sepsis (fever, malaise).More than two thirds of infant with septic arthritis are
afebrile.
 Neonates present with pseudo paralysis of extremities, discomfort while changing the
diaper, unhappy or out of sorts but rarely appears to be ill or moribund.Ultrasound
examination of suspected septic hip joint greatly aids in diagnosis.
315

Orthopedic Conditions
Refer the patient immediately to an orthopaedic surgeon.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Keep the joint in position of comfort.
 Aspiration of the joint for gram staining, culture and sensitivity.
 If aspirate is purulent, drainage of the joint on an emergency basis.
 Drain the joint even if the joint aspiration is doubtful in the presence of a strong clinical
suspicion, because the risks of negative arthrotomy are far too less than not draining an
infected joint having pus. The latter situation may be disastrous for the joint resulting in
lifelong permanent disability to the patient.
 After drainage splint the joint with a POP slab or skin traction to relieve pain and prevent
contractures till the patient is a febrile, pain free and the joint is clinically quiescent.
Intermittent mobilization is permitted to preserve the range of movement of the joint.
Pharmacological treatment
The choice of antibiotics, duration of therapy and monitoring of the therapy are same as
mentioned in the section on acute pyogenic osteomyelitis.
References
1. Osteomyelitis and Septic Arthritis. In: Nelson's Textbook of Paediatrics. Berhman, Kliegman, Jenson et al
(eds), 17th Edition, 2004, W.B. Saunder Company, Philadelphia, pp 2297-2302.
2. Bone and Joint Sepsis. In: Lovell and Winter's Paediatric Orthopaedics. Morissy RT, Weinstein SL, Vol. 4,
1996, Lippincott Raven, Philadelphia.
316