Chapter 16
SURGERY
PRE-OPERATIVE ASSESSMENT AND PREPARATIONS
Pre operative preparation consists of-
 Gather and record concisely all relevant information
 Devise a plan to minimise risk and maximise the benefit to the patients
 Consider possible adverse events and how to deal with them
 Ensure that everyone, including the patient, understands the surgical plan.
Preoperative assessment of the patient
For achieving the desired optimum result in a surgical patient, apart from evaluating the
nature and extent of the diseases and choice of surgery from available options the
assessment of the patient to withstand the stress of surgery and anaesthesia is very
important. The factors that must be considered in preoperative assessment are
 The disease (and its extent) for which the surgery is planned.
 The condition of the patient,organ system.
 The relative urgency of the surgery.
 The type of surgery and its alternatives.
 The relative morbidity and mortality of the disease andthesurgical procedure.
 All these factors are interdependentand this assessment is the most fundamental task to
be performed in a surgical patient. Surgeon may at times, need the help of a physician,
cardiologist or anesthetist, to take the right decision. The preoperative assessment should
also include discussion on drugs being taken by the patient and documentation ofknown
allergies.
Informed consent
Informed consent should be taken after a detailed discussion by the surgeon (or his
responsible assistant)with the patient and his close relatives ,informing them about the nature
of the procedure planned, benefits expected, risks involved and possible alternatives, giving
full opportunity to them to ask questions and clear doubts.
Preoperative preparation
 Routine investigations Hb, TLC, DLC, CT, BT, urine routine examination, and in patients
over 30 years, chest X-ray and ECG should be done.
 Special and specific investigations depending upon the nature of the procedure planned
and the physical condition of the patient for evaluating fitness for surgery.
 Lipstick, nail polish and other cosmetics which may mask cyanosis and interfere with
pulse oximetry should be removed.
 Dentures, spectacles, contact lenses, artificial limbs, artificial eyes, hearing aid and
jewellery, cash and mobile phones should be removed before shifting the patient to
operation theatre.
317

Surgery
 Withholding feeds before surgery depending upon age of the patient and nature of
anaesthesia and surgeryplanned.
 Bathing, if possible,patient should take a proper bath on the day prior and onthe morning
of surgery giving special attention to the operative area. Patient should wear only clean
hospital clothing.
 Hair removal should be done as closeto thetimeofsurgeryas possible. If
 The skin is to be shaved which is best done immediately before surgery. These are best
removed with a clipper or chemical depilator. Shaving results in damage to skin and leads
to abrasions that maynot be visible and may lead to post operative wound infection.
 Oneshould ask for history of allergic reactions toanychemical solutions.
 While scrubbing, one should work away from the operative site. Visibly soiled skin
should be washed with soap and water before using surgical scrub. Preanaesthetic
medication as perpolicy.
 Skin preparation for surgery: Preoperative surgical antisepsis aims at blocking infection
in to surgical wound and consists of hand washing, gloving along with application of
antiseptic to surgical site. Different surgical scrubs available for skin preparation before
surgical procedure include anyofthe following:
Povidone-iodine: It acts by oxidation/substitution of free iodine. Povidone iodine is used as
a surgical scrub after combining with detergent. It is effective against gram positive bacteria
but weaker against other microorganisms. It has a residual activity and is active in presence
of organic substance. It is absorbed through skin. It can be used on mucus membranes.
Patient skin sensitivity isoccasionallyaproblem.
Chlorhexidine gluconate
It is a broadspectrum antiseptic that is betterthan povidone-iodine as a bactericidal. This has
aresidual activity that continues tokill microorganisms after application.It is not effective in
presence of organic material like soap sand oils, blood and body fluids. It should be avoided
in preparation ofeye. It maybeusedaloneorin combination with cetrimide.
Alcohol (70% ethyl or isopropyl alcohol): It is 95% effectiveagainst gram negative and
gram positive bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi and viruses. It is not completely effectiveagainst
spores. Alltraces of alcohol should be dry before drapes are put. Alcohol is never used on
mucus membranes and openwounds as it maycauses desiccation.
 Drug treatment: e.g. prophylactic antibiotics (see section on antibiotic prophylaxis),
antihypertensives, IV fluids, anticoagulants, Vitamin K etc. whererelevant.
 Nondrug treatment e.g., rectal washouts,stomach wash,etc.where relevant.
 Handling of medicolegal cases: First aid has to be provided in all cases who report in an
emergency state. After stabilizing the patient, patient should be properly guided and
helped in shifting to the appropriate centre.
 In case where we treat medicolegal cases, we must send information (in duplicate) to the
police. Prepare a medicolegal report. Preserve and seal clothes etc. Preserve fluid and
stain samples where indicated. Respond to information sought by the police. Arrange to
318

Surgery
take dying declaration, where indicated. Preserve all X-rays and patient records. Respond
to court summons. In case of death, handover the body to the police. In case of
discharge/referral, police needs to be informed. Care during transfer. This would depend
on a number of factors like nature, patient's condition, and reasons for referral, readiness
of the referral centre to accept the patient and whether the transfer is an emergency or
elective.
Emergency transfer
 Identify the degree ofemergency.
 Resuscitative measures to be adopted in serious patients with management of shock,
oxygen etc.
 Transfer in a well equipped ambulance to appropriate referral center with prior intimation
andconfirmation thereadiness at the referral centre.
 Doctor or paramedical staff to accompany the sick patient.
 Referral slip should contain information on: Condition of the patient when first seen.
Diagnosis and resuscitative measures taken. Reasons for referral. Where referred
Precautions advised during transportation. Any other information (e.g. any staff or
equipment sent along with, any communication given to referral centre or specialist
concerned).
POST-OPERATIVE CARE
I. POSTOPERATIVE PAINRELIEF
 Postoperative pain is associated with all surgical procedures. This varies according to the
surgical procedure. Severe pain can prolong gastrointestinal ileus, urinary retention,
impair respiratory movements producing atelectasis and predisposes to deep vein
thrombosis due to immobilization.
 Various methods to alleviate postoperative pain are NSAIDs, opioids (intra muscular,
transdermal or transmucosal), patient controlled analgesia, local infiltration of anaesthetic
drugs, epidural analgesia and intrapleural analgesia. The method used depends upon the
site and the magnitude of surgery done, severity of pain, whether the patient is allowed
orally, facilities and expertise available. It is necessary to give analgesics by
intramuscular or intravenous route in the immediate postoperative period and till the
patient is ableto accept orally.
Commonlyused agents are
 Inj. diclofenacsodium 75 mg 6-8 hourly Or
 Inj. tramadol (50 mg/ml) IM/IV 4-6 hourly,
 Inj.pentazocine (30mg/ml) 30-60mgIM/IV repeated 3-4hourly.
 Inj. morphine (15 mg/ml)10-15mg,can be repeated 4-6 times.
 In tertiary care centers, epidural analgesia, intravenous patient controlled analgesia,
intrapleural analgesia can be used under expert care.
319

Surgery
When patient is able to accept orally,
 Tab.paracetamol 500mg3-4 times a day.Or
 Tab.ibuprofen 400-600mg 8 hourly.
II. POSTOPERATIVE NAUSEA AND VOMITING
 Post operative nausea and vomiting lead to significant morbidity and prolonged
hospitalization. It has an incidenceof 20-30% afterabdominal surgery.
 Predisposing factors are diabetes mellitus, pregnancy, dehydration, electrolyte
imbalance, gastroesophageal reflux,emergency surgery, use of certain anaesthetic drugs
and opioids.
Non- pharmacological treatment
Bowel obstruction (mechanical or paralytic ileus) should be ruled out as a cause of vomiting
by proper examination and investigations. Nausea and vomiting are managed with bed rest,
intravenous fluids, analgesics to relieve postoperative pain,nasogastricdecompression
Pharmacological treatment
 Inj. metoclopramide (5mg/ml)10 mg IM/IV TDS or SOS. Or
 Inj.ondansetron (2mg/ml) 4 mg slow IV or IM OD
III.POSTOPERATIVE PNEUMONIA
 Pulmonary disorders remain the most frequent postoperative problem and 10- 15% of
patients are considered to have clinically significant chest complication after surgery
under general anaesthesia.
 Factors predisposing to increased chest complications are smoking, obesity, chronic
restrictive and obstructive lung disease, prolonged general anaesthesia and presence of
nasogastric tube. Postoperative pneumonia is caused by pathogens such as Pseudomonas,
Serratia,Klebsiella, Proteus andStreptococcus
Salient features
 Fever,productive cough, dyspnoea,chest pain.
 Bronchial breathingand presence of rales.
.
 Chest X-ray shows area of consolidation
Pharmacological treatment
 Antibiotics: Depending upon sputum culture and sensitivity. Initial treatment can be
started with aminoglycoside andcephalosporin.
 Inj.diclofenac75mg1M every6-8hours.
 Chest physiotherapy
 Nebulized bronchodilators maybe used ifbronchospasm is present.
Antibiotic prophylaxis in surgery
The goals ofprophylactic administrationof antibioticsto surgical patients are to:
 Reduce the incidence of surgical site infection;
320

Surgery
 Use antibiotics in a manner that is supported by evidence of effectiveness; minimize the
effect of antibiotics on the patient's normal bacterial flora; adverse effects.
Prophylaxis is uniformly recommended for all clean-contaminated, contaminated and
dirty procedures. It is considered optional for most clean procedures, although it may be
indicated for certain patients and clean procedures that fulfill specific risk criteria. It is
important to emphasize that surgical antibiotic prophylaxis is an adjunct to, not a
substitute for goodsurgical technique.
 Antibiotics prophylaxis should be regarded as one component of an effective policy for
the control of hospital acquired infection in procedure that requires the insertion of
implants or prosthetic devices, the term. Surgical site infection is used to encompass the
surgical wound and the implant. Surgical site infection also encompasses infections
involving the body cavity (e.g. subphrenic abscess), bones, joints, meninges and other
tissues involved in the operation. Throughout this guideline the term surgical site
infection (SSl) is used, unless the evidence relates specifically to surgical wound
infection.
SURGICAL SITE INFECTION
Criteria for defining a surgical site infection (SSI)
Superficialincisional SSI
 Infection occurs within 30 day after the operation and infection involves only skin of
subcutaneous tissue of the incision and at least one of the following
 Purulent drainage, with or without laboratory confirmation, from the superficial incision
 Organisms isolated from an aseptically obtained culture of fluid or tissue from the
superficial incision.
 At least one of the following signs or symptoms of infection: Pain or tenderness, localized
swelling, redness, heat and superficial incision is deliberately opened by a surgeon,
unless, incision is culture-negative
 Diagnosis of superficial incisional SSI by the surgeon or attending physician
Deep incisional SSI
 Infection occurs within 30 days after the operation if no implant is left in place or within
one year if implant is in place and the infection appears to be related to the operation and
infection involves deep soft tissues (e.g. fascial and muscle layers)of the incision and at
least one of the following
 Purulent drainage from the deep incision but not from the organ/space component of the
surgical site.
 A deep incision spontaneouslydehisces or is deliberatelyopened by a surgeon when the
patient has at least one of the following signs or symptoms: fever (>38°C) localizedpain
tenderness unless site is culture-negative
 An abscess or other evidence of infection involving the deep incision is found on direct
examination,during re-operation,or by histopathologyor radiologic examination.
321

Surgery
 Diagnosis of deep incisional SSI by a surgeon or attending physician.
Organ/space SSI
 Infection occurs within 30 days after the operation if no implant is left in place or within
one year if implant is in place and the infection appears to be related to the operation and
infection involves any part of the anatomy (e.g. organs or spaces), other than the incision,
which was opened or manipulated during an operation and at least one of the following
 Purulent discharge from a drain that is placed through a stab wound in to the organ/space.
 Organisms isolated from an aseptically obtained culture of fluid or tissue in the
organ/space.
 An abscess or other evidence of infection involving the organ/space that is found on
direct examination, during re-operation, or by histopathologic or radiologic examination.
 Diagnosis of an organ/space SSIby a surgeon or attending physician.
Pharmacological treatment
 The antibiotics selected for prophylaxis must cover the common pathogens. Antibiotics
election is influenced by the organism most commonly causing wound. Infection in the
specific procedure and by the relative costs of available agents.
 Gastrointestinal procedures, oral and intravenous administration of agents with activity
against gram-negative and anaerobic bacteria are warranted, as well as mechanical
preparation of the bowel. Ceftriaxone/cefotaxime provides adequate coverage for most
other types of procedures. The antibiotics chosen for prophylaxis can be those used for
active treatment of infection. However, the chosen antibiotics must reflect local disease-
specific information about the common pathogens and their antimicrobial susceptibility.
A past history of a serious adverse event should preclude administration of a particular
antibioticlike penicillin.
Timing and duration of prophylaxis
 The first dose should always be given before the procedure, preferably within 30 minutes
before incision. Re-administration at one to two half-lives of the antibiotic is
recommended for the duration of the procedure. In general, postoperative administration
is not recommended.
 There may be situations where overriding factors alter the normal timing of
administration. For example, during a caesarean section prophylaxis should be delayed
until the cord is clamped in order to prevent the drug reaching the neonate. When a
tourniquet is to be applied the necessary tissue concentration must be achieved prior to its
application rather than the time of incision. This probably occurs within10 minutes of
administration of an IV antibiotic injection. Antibiotics should also be administered
immediately after unexpected contamination of the tissues additional doses during the
operation.
The individual surgeon should be free to give an extra dose for prolonged operations with
major blood loss if they wish. However, there is insufficient evidence to make a general
recommendation. Antibioticprophylaxis should be confined to the perioperative period.
322

Surgery
Route of administration
Intravenous administration of antibiotic prophylaxis immediately before or after induction of
anesthesia is the most reliable method for ensuring effective serum antibiotic concentrations
at the time of surgery.
Dose selection
A single dose of antibiotic at the therapeutic concentration is sufficient for prophylaxis under
most circumstances. In adults, blood loss of up to1500 ml duringsurgery or haemodilution up
to 15 ml/kg does not require an additional dose of prophylactic agent.
In the event of major intraoperative blood loss (>1500ml) additional doses of prophylactic
antibiotic should be given after fluid replacement. Antibiotic prophylaxis in all cardiac
surgeries and interventions is recommended.
Table 1. Incidence of surgical site infections (SSI) with various types of surgery
SSI
Type of surgery Name of Surgeries
rate
Elective,not emergency, non traumatic,primarilyclosed; no
<2
Clean acute inflammation ; no break in technique; respiratory,
gastrointestinal,biliary and genitorurinary tracts not entered
Urgent or emergency case that is otherwise clean; elective
Clean-
openingof respiratory, gastrointestinal, biliary or genitourinary <10
contaminated
tract with minimal spillage (e.g.appendectomy) not
encounteringinfected urine or bile; minor techniquebreak
Nonpurulent inflammation; gross pillage from gastrointestinal
Contaminated tract; entry into biliary or genitourinary tract in the presenceof
~20
infected bile or urine; major break in technique; penetrating
trauma<4hours old; chronic open wounds to be grafted or
covered
Purulent inflammation (e.g. abscess);preoperativeperforation of
Dirty ~40
respiratory, gastrointestinal, biliary or genitourinary tract;
penetratingtrauma>4hours old
323

Surgery
Infection risk factors: Factors associated with increased risk of infection are:
Systemic factors: Diabetes, corticosteroid use, obesity, extremes of age, malnutrition, recent
surgery, massive transfusion, multiple (3 ormore) preoperative co morbid medical diagnoses
Local factors: foreign body, electrocautery; injection with epinephrine; wound drains; hair
removal with razor; previous irradiation of site.
Development of local guidelines
It is advisable to make local surgical site infection prevention protocols be developed by local
hospital management.
Postoperative wound management
 Most postoperative wounds are covered with occlusive dressings The occlusive dressing
(semi permeable to water vapours and oxygen but impermeable to liquids) consists of a
hydrating layer (antibiotic ointments or petroleum jelly), a non-adherent contact layer, an
absorbent and cushioning layer(gauze), and a se curing layer like hypo allergic tape.
Occlusive dressings should be applied within 2 hours of wounding and left on for at least 24
hours for optimal healing to occur for acute wounds. These should never be used on infected
wounds. Dressing changes can be performed once or twice daily. If other types of occlusive
are used, the timing of the dressing changes will vary between I to 7 days, depending on the
wound characteristics.
POSTOPERATIVE WOUND INFECTION
Wound infections areclassified as
 Minore.g. stitch abscess, cellulitis.
 Majore.g. presenceofdiscrete collection ofpus in wound.
 Superficial infections are limited to skin and subcutaneoustissue.
 Deep infections-involve the areas ofwound belowthe fascia.
Postoperative cross infection in wards: Staphylococcus aureus is the most frequently involved
organism. Other less common organisms are Enterococci, Pseudomonas, Proteus, E. Coli and
Klebsiella.
Salient features
 Pain is unusually severe for the magnitude of procedure and last long. Fever: 101 to
102 Fwith tachycardia is usually present.
 Local examination: Wound is warm to touch and may be swollen and oedematous.
Redness of the surrounding area and cellulites is often present.
 Wound infections are generally evident between 3rd to 6th postoperative days
324

Surgery
Superficial infection
 Drainage: Wounds are managed byopeningup the incision to provide adequate drainage.
 Dressing: Daily dressing with povidone-iodine 5% and a wick is placed to prevent premature
closureofthe wound.
 Analgesics: Tab. ibuprofen 400mg 3 times aday till pain is there.
Deep infections
 Antibiotics are given on the basis of pus culture and sensitivity in addition to drainage of
wound.
Prevention
Postoperativewound infection rate can be minimized by adequate skin preparation, bowel
preparation, prophylactic antibiotics, meticulous surgical technique
WOUNDCARE
Wounds can be classified as acute or chronic and further as arterial, venous trophic, malignant.
Acute wounds heal uneventfully within an expected time frame e.g. burns. For the purpose of
guidelines, chronicwounds can bedefined as an ulcerpresent at least for6 weeks.
Treatment
Meticulous wound care includes adequate cleansing, debridement, oedema control and
prevention of ischemia,
Acute wounds
 The overall objective in caring for wounds that are incompletely clotted is to minimize
unnecessaryblood loss and to avoid the formation ofa hematoma.
 Irrigate gently with copious quantities of water or normal saline. Debris and necrotic tissue
should be removed without damaging healthy tissue. Sharp mechanical debridement may be
necessary to expose viable tissue for large areas of fibrinous exudates or eschar. Chemical
debridement is useful for those areas that are difficult to access by sharp debridement.
Chemical debridement of the wounds may be done using topical antiseptics (chlorhexidine,
povidoneiodine, alcohol, hydrogenperoxide, triclosan) and antibacterials (silver sulfadiazine,
neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, mupirocin).When debridement is complete, dressings can
be applied.
 Healing of acute wound is further facilitatedby closure. Alternatively,closure can be delayed
for several days to allow infection to clear. Wound healing is impaired by malnutrition,
oedema, bacterial contamination, ischemia, smoking and immunosuppressant.
Chronic wounds
Identify and treat the predisposing factors, e.g. diabetes mellitus, peripheral arterial or venous
disease, severe anemia, protein deficiency, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic vasculitis, cushing’s
syndrome andconditions requiringsystemic steroid therapy.
325

Surgery
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Encourage daily or twice a day bath, to avoid walking bare foot or with slippers and patient
should been courage to wear shoes and socks.
 Patients with leg ulcer to reduce standing or excessive walking. In leg ulcer due to chronic
venous insufficiency or oedema, patients should be advised to wear elastic stockings,
elevation of leg and foot end of the bed while a sleep along with some leg exercises to
activate the calf muscle pump.
Pharmacological treatment
Identify the microorganism and treat accordingly. Tubercular ulcer is treated with anti tubercular
drug (2HRZE+7HR) for at least 9 months.
Surgical treatment
 Surgical debridement in ulcer associated with necrotic tissue or slough. Clean the wound
with physiological normal saline or tap water only (antiseptics delay wound healing).
 Daily dressing: Gauze adhere to the wound bed and it may remove viable tissue from the
wound surface on removal , resulting in delayed wound healing. Some of the commonly used
dressings are:
 Occlusive (moist ureretentive) dressings (Hydrocolloid gel) in case of clean and shallow
ulcers without any pus discharge or other features of infection. Occlusive dressings have
barrier properties that enable to prolong the presence of moisture and wound fluid in the
wound bed.
 Calcium alginate dressing: For bleeding wounds and wounds with a cavity.
Patient education
 To prevent ulcer in future, explain about the care of leg ulcers, wearing socks, shoes and
compression stocking.
 Good personal hygiene (daily bath) and after bath the healed scar area should be massaged
with an emollient cream such as lanolin or some other oil to keep the scar tissue soft and
supple and prevent further breakdown.
 Regular use of calf muscle activating exercises and leg elevation and to avoid prolonged
period of standing or sitting with legs down. In case of diabetic patients, control of diabetes is
necessary.
STERILIZATION AND DISINFECTION
Definitions
Sterilization is removal of all viable micro-organisms, vegetative and spores. Disinfection is the
removal of actively dividing vegetative micro-organisms. Antisepsis is the process whereby the
risk of medical cross-infection by micro-organisms is reduced
326

Surgery
Methods of Sterilization
I. Heat
 Dry heat (e.g. incineration, flaming to red hot) is effective but rarely useful. Dry heat
requires temperatures of 160Â°C for at least 60min.
 Moist heat (e.g. autoclave heating using pressurized steam 121Â°C at 15lb/in 2 for
15min) is effective and useful especially in operating theatres.
II. Irradiation, Gamma radiation effective for inorganic material Filtration: Air or fluids can
be sterilized by ultrafine membrane filters but are rarely useful in hospital practice
III. Chemical
 Acids/alkalis, e.g. bleach. Effective for non-human contact use.;
 Alcohols/phenols, e.g. ethyl alcohol skin swabs, alcohol solutions hand disinfection
carbolic; chloroxylenols (Dettol), phenol (Clearsol )
 Oxidizers, e.g. povidone-iodine (Betadine) skin disinfection/surgical scrubbing;
H O superficial wound cleansing; aldehydes (Cidex) surgical instruments such as
2 2
endoscopes; Cationic solutions, e.g. Chlorhexidine antiseptic washes.;
 Organic dyes, e.g. Proflavin
Antisepsis: Principles of antisepsis include the following.
 Always remove gross contamination with simple soap first.
 Use high potency acid/alkali disinfection on inert surfaces.
 Use less corrosive oxidizers on delicate inert materials.
 Use weak alcohols, oxidizers for skin cleansing.
SUTURING OF PRIMARY WOUND
Suturing is one of the first and foremost thing any surgeon will perform in his or her career.
Consider following points while suturing primary wounds.
Salient features
 Time of occurrence of wound and its etiology
 Co morbidities like diabetes mellitus, anemia, scurvy, jaundice
 Number, site, size, depth active bleeding, discharge, foreign material, associated
neurovascular injury, tendon injury, bone fracture and make proper documentation of all
injuries to be done in patient records.
Investigations
 Usually not required. X-rays of local part are needed if fracture or foreign body is suspected.
Pharmacological treatment
 Inj. tetanus toxoid 0.5 ml IM stat
327

Surgery
 Inj. diclofenac sodium 3 ml (75mg) IM stat
 Tab. ampicillin 500 mg three times day for 3-5 days
 Tab. diclofenac 50 mg twice day for 3-5 days
 Tab. multivitamins/Iron if patient is deficient of any for better healing
 Control of Diabetes mellitus, if present
 Management of local wound: if wound is recent(<6 hrs) cleaning followed by suturing is
done. If duration of injury is >6 hrs, and contamination is present, wound is debrided and
wound is closed by secondary suturing at a later date when wound is clean.
 For primary suturing: Thorough cleaning of wound by saline/Hydrogen Peroxide/Betadine.
 Removal of any foreign material and control of active bleeding.
Choice of suturematerial
The size of suture material is measured by its width or diameter and is vital to proper wound
closure.
 1-0 and 2-0: Used for high stress areas requiring strong retention, i.e. -deep fascia repair
 3-0: Used in areas requiring good retention, i.e. -scalp, torso, and hands
 4-0: Used in areas requiring minimal retention, i.e. extremities. Is the most common size
utilized for superficial wound closure.
 5-0: Used for areas involving the face, nose, ears, eyebrows, and eyelids.
 6-0: Used on areas requiring little or no retention. Primarily used for cosmetic effects
Suture Techniques: Wound layers should be placed in close approximation. Minimal amount of
tension across the suture line should be kept. Wound edges should be slightly everted. Equal
bites, horizontally and vertically are important for wound position and healing. Debride
devitalized tissue. Alternate day dressing with antiseptic solution till suture removal
Suture removal
 Duration will vary according to the location and depth of the wound. However, the average
time frame is 7-10 days after application. The following general rules can be sued in deciding
when to remove sutures:
 Face: 4-5 days.
 Body & scalp: 7 days.
 Soles, palms, back or over joints: 10 days
 Any suture with pus or signs of infections should be removed immediately. Once MO
determines that the sutures should be removed, a suture removal kit, consisting of scissors
and a pair of tooth forceps is utilized to remove the sutures.
 Using the tooth forceps, grasp the knot and snip the suture below the knot with the scissors as
close as possible to the skin. Pull the suture line through the tissue and place on a 4x4. Once
all sutures have been removed count the sutures. The number of sutures needs to match the
328

Surgery
number indicated in the patient's health record.
ACUTE APPENDICITIS
It is inflammation of appendix caused by luminal obstruction due to fecoliths (50%), lymphoid
hyperplasia, malignancy or rarely parasitic infection.
Salient features
 Vague periumbilical or sometimes epigastic pain of visceral nature from a dilated appendix
which migrates to right lower quadrant and becomes somatic in nature from contact of
serosa of inflammed appendix against the parietal peritoneum.
 Pain followed by anorexia,nausea and occasional vomiting, fever in 50% of cases
 McBurney's sign : migratory nature of pain that settels at McBurney's point (one third of
the distence from the anterior superior iliac spine to the umbilicus
 Rebound tenderness
 Perforated appendicitis may present with more severe abdominal pain ,progressing from
focal peritonitis to generalized peritonitis with rebound tenderness, voluntory guarding
followed by involuntary guarding and finally rigidity.
Diagnosis
 Blood counts (neutrophillia), USG Abdomen (shows inflamed appendix) CECT Abdomen, if
RIF lump is palpable.
Pharmacological treatment
 In early catarrhal appendicitis, with minimally inflamed appendix patient can be given
medical and conservative management which includes-
- Tab. ciprofloxacin 500mg BD and Tab. metronidazole 400 mg TDS or a second generation
cephalosporin cefotaxim 1 gm BD
 Inj.diclofenac 75 mg IM
 Tab.ranitidine 150 mg BDor Cap. omeprazole 40 mg BD
Surgical treatment Appendicectomy by open or laproscopic approch
HERNIA
I. INGUINAL HERNIA
Inguinal hernias are the most common hernias world wide. Most commonly seen in men. Several
classifications are available worldwide but none has been prove to be perfect, besides, most
surgeons in the world commonly classify them as being Direct or Indirect inguinal hernias.
Direct inguinal hernia is the one which occurs medial to deep epigastric artery, through
Hesselbach's triangle. Indirect inguinal hernia occurs through deep ring.
329

Surgery
Salientfeatures
 Groin swelling reducible, impulsile, history of strenuous activity, heavy labour, chronic
cough, chronic constipation, urinary complains. Examination of swelling is required.
 Reducible, impulse on coughing present, examination of scrotum and penis
 Per rectal examination, systemic examination of chest and abdomen is required.
Investigations
 Diagnosis of hernia is purely clinical, investigations are required where diagnosis is
inconclusive or for evaluation of associated conditions.
 USG-local part for defect. USG-KUB for urinary complains.
 S. PSA if prostate is enlarged
 Prostatic biopsy. Pulmonary function tests for chronic cough
Pharmacological treatment
 Treatment of predisposing factors if present any
 Treatment of chronic cough according to cause
 Treatment of Chronic constipation
 Treatment of BPH if present, pharmacological as well surgical
Surgical treatment
 Herniotomy, for congenital hernias
 Hernioplasty for open gold standard for any type of adult hernia at present. Lichtenstein
tension free hernioplasty
 By laparoscopic hernioplasty is preferred in small and bilateral hernia.
 TEP-Totally Extra peritoneal meshplasty
 TAPP-Trans Abdominal Preperitoneal meshplasty
II. INCISIONAL HERNIA
Incisional hernia is defined as hernia occurring through any previous surgical incision.
Predisposing factors are improper techniques of wound closure ,wound infection, wound
dehiscence, malnutrition, malignancy
Salient feature
 In history evaluate nature of primary surgery, Wound complications following primary
surgery, presence of malnutrition and associated comorbidities.
 Physical examination of scar and defect and swelling, reducible impulsile on coughing
Investigations
USG local part for defect, Preoperative investigations
Surgical Treatment
330

Surgery
 Underlay: preperitoneal mesh placement under the defect, preferred route
 Inlay: mesh placement thought the defect
 Onlay/Overlay: Mesh placement above the defect in muscular plane
 Laparoscopic mesh placement under the defect, preferred whenever possible
HYDROCOELE
Hydrocele is an abnormal collection of serous fluid in apart of the proccessus vaginalis, usually
the tunica. Acquired hydrocele are primary or idiopathic, or secondary to testicular disease.
Causes includes excessive production of fluid within the sac, e.g. secondary hydrocele, by
defective absorption of fluid, e.g. primary hydrocele, by interference with lymphatic drainage of
scrotal structures, by connection with the peritoneal cavity via a patent processus vaginalis.
Salient features
 Hydroceles are translucent and it is possible to get above swelling. Primary vaginal
hydrocele is most common in middle and later life but can also occur in older children.
Swelling is painless. The testis may be palpable within a lax hydrocele, but an ultrasound
scan is necessary to visualize the testis if the hydrocele sac is tense. Testicular
malignancy is an uncommon cause of hydrocele that can be excluded by ultrasound
examination of the scrotum.
 About 5% inguinal hernia are associated with a vaginal hydrocele of that side. In
congenital hydrocele, pressure on it does not always empty it but the hydrocele fluid may
drain into the peritoneal cavity when the child is lying down.
 Encysted hydrocele of cord is smooth oval swelling near the spermatic cord, which is
liable to be mistaken for an inguinal hernia.
 The swelling moves downwards and becomes less mobile if the testis is pulled gently
downwards.
 Hydrocele of canal of Nuck is similar condition in female. The cyst lies in relation to the
round ligament and is always at least partially within the inguinal canal.
Surgical treatment
Congenital hydrocele requires herniotomy while acquired hydrocele -jaboulay's procedure or
Lord's procedure
CHOLELITHIASIS
Cholelithiasis or gall bladder stones are common problem in our country. It may lead to
cholecystitis, cholangitis, choledocholithiasis with obstructive jaundice gall stone pancreatitis.
Gall stones may be of cholesterol stones, pigment stones, mixed stones
331

Surgery
Salient features
 “Fatty forty flatulent fertile female” is the classical description of cholelithiasis.
 Right upper quadrant epigastric pain, dyapepsia, nausea, vomiting.
 Murphy’s sign.
Investigations
Ultrasound abdomen, total and differential count, liver function test
Surgical treatment
 Definitive treatment is cholecystectomy in symptomatic and asymptomatic patients
with diabetes or a solitary large stone or multiple small stones with wide cystic
duct or porcelain gall bladder or anxious patients. If the patient comes after 48 hours
manage conservatively and cholecystectomy after 6-8 weeks.
 In case of acute cholecystitis, empyema gall bladder, and stones in the CBD following
treatment is instituted.
Pharmacological treatment
 Maintenance IV fluids
 Inj. ciprofloxacin (infusion 100 mg/50 ml) 100 ml IV twice a day and Inj. gentamicin (40
mg/ml) 2 ml IV 8 hourly.
 In case anaerobic bacterial infection is suspected or anticipated, give Inj. metronidazole
(500 mg/l00 ml) 100 ml IV 8 hourly.
 Inj. diclofenac sodium (25 mg/ml) 2 -3 ml IM SOS or 6 hourly or Inj. pentazocine (30
mg/ml) 1ml IM SOS.
 Inj. hyoscine butylbromide (20 mg/ml) 1ml IV SOS.
 In patients having obstructive jaundice, add Inj. vitamin K (10 mg/ml) 1 ml IM once or
twice a day till prothrombin time reaches to asatisfactory level.
 Antibiotics are usually stopped after 5-7 days unless the patient has evidence of persistent
infection or has indwelling tube (e.g., T-tube).
Patient education
 To avoid fatty and fried meals for 3 months.
 Although ambulation is encouraged as early as possible, heavy physical exertion should be
avoided for 2 weeks (after laparoscopic cholecystectomy) and for 3 months after
conventional cholecystectomy.
 If T-tube has been placed, it should be removed after 2-3 weeks, after ensuring that the
CBD is patent, non dilated and there is free flow of contrast into the duodenum during T-
tube cholangiography.
332

Surgery
HYDATID DISEASE OF LIVER
It is caused byEchinococcus granulosus and Echinococcus multilocularis
Salient features
 Disease may be entirely asymptomatic. Abdominal lump in right upper quadrant. Pain
may be characterized as heaviness in abdomen.
 Obstructive jaundice when daughter cyst may communicate with biliary tree.
Anaphylactic shock if cyst ruptures into peritoneal cavity.
Classification by WHO
 Group 1-Active group-cysts larger than 2 cm and often fertile
 Group 2- Transition group- cysts starting to degenerate and entering a transitional stage
because of host resistance or treatment but mat contain viable protoscolices
 Group 3- Inactive group- degenerated, partially or totally calcified cysts, unlikely to contain
viable protoscolices
Investigations
 TC and DC show eosinophillia. ELISA can point toward diagnosis. Ultrasound and CT scan
are the investigations of choice. CT scan shown smooth space occupying lesion with several
septa
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. albendazole 400 mg TDS for 28 days repeated for 3 cycles.
Surgical treatment
 PAIR-Puncture, Aspiration, Injection (of a scolicidal agent), Reaspiration
 Radical or partial pericystectomy
 Hepatic segmentectomy
 Scolicidal agents used for surgery: hypertonic saline 15%, cetrimide 3%
OBSTRUCTIVE JAUNDICE
Jaundice, also known as hyperbilirubinemia causes increased levels of bilirubin in the
extracellular fluid. Concentration of bilirubin in blood is normally below 1.2 mg/dL. A
concentration higher than 2.5 mg/dL (>50µmol/L) leads to jaundice. It can be caused by
choledocholithiasis, periampullary mass, billiary atresia, cholangiocarcinoma, Mirizzi syndrome
Salient features
 Jaundice, itching, anorexia, weight loss, clay coloured stools, dark urine
 Abdominal lump, abdominal examination, look for palpable mass, liver,
 General examination: Jaundice, cachexia
333

Surgery
Investigations
 S. bilirubin: total, direct, indirect, hyperbilirubinemia with increased direct bilirubin, PT with
INR, elevated, SGPT, SGOT- can be normal or elevated, SAP- increased more than 3 folds,
CA 19-9, elevated in periampullary cancers
 USG-Abdomen, MRCP, CECT-Abdomen, ERCP
Non pharmacological treatment
Low fat, high carbohydrate diet
Pharmacological treatment
 IV fluids to maintain hydration and Correction of electrolyte imbalance
 Inj. vitamin k
 Fresh frozen plasma when indicated
 Prophylactic antibiotics, Inj. cefotaxime1 gm IV 8 hourly
Surgical treatment
 ERCP with sphincterotomy and stenting, followed by cholecystectomy
 For choledocholithiasis, cholecystectomy with CBD exploration
 For stones not amenable for retrieved by ERCP
 Whipple procedure (pancreaticoduodenectomy), for resectable periampullary mass
 Bypass procedures (hepaticojejunostomy with/without gastrojejunostomy) for unresectable
periampullary mass
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
Causes
 Intraluminal-impaction, foreign bodies, bezoars, gall stones
 Intramural-stricture, malignancy
 Extramural-bands/adhesion, hernia, volvulus intussusecption
 Adynamic-paralytic ileus ,mesenteric vascular occlusion ,pseudo obstruction
Mechanism of obstruction
Volvulus, incarceration, obstruction, intussusceptions
Causes of strangulation
 External: hernial orifices, adhesion/bands
 Interrupted blood flow: volvulus, intussusceptions
 Increased intraluminal pressure: closed loop obstruction
 Primary: mesenteric infarction
334

Surgery
Salientfeatures
 Acute-sudden onset severe colicky central abdominal pain, distension, early vomiting,
constipation
 Acute on chronic -short history of distension and vomiting against a background of pain
and constipation
 Chronic in large bowel obstruction with lower abdominal colic ,absolute constipation
followed by distension subacute implies incomplete obstruction
 Other manifestation are dehydration, hypokalemia pyrexia, abdominal tenderness,
clinical features of strangulation; constant pain, tenderness with rigidity, shock
Investigations
 X ray abdomen in standing position, shows multiple air fluid levels
 Total and differential counts
 Ultrasound abdomen
 Contrast enhanced ct scan abdomen with pelvis
Non surgical treatment
 Nasogastric decompression, correction of dehydration, correction of electrolytes imbalance
and broad spectrum antibiotics
Surgical treatment
 Exploratory laprotomy with adhesiolysis, resection of non viable intestine or extirpation of
obstructing lesion.
TYPHOID PERFORATION
It is caused bySalmonella typhi.
Salient features
 The patient resides or recently visited an endemic area. Patient presents in 2nd or 3rd
week of illness.
 Patients present with high temperature and very toxic, Ross spots, abdominal pain,
malena, diarrhoea, abdominal tenderness and guarding.
Investigations
TC and DC shows relative neutropenia, Widal test, Blood and Stool culture, X ray abdomen
standing shows free gas under diaphragm
Non pharmacological treatment
 Patient should be admitted to intensive care unit
 Vigorous resuscitation of fluids
335

Surgery
 Inj. ceftriaxone 2 gm loading dose followed by 1 gm IV 8 hourly
 Tab. metronidazol 400 mg IV 8 hourly
Surgical treatment
 Emergency exploratory laparotomy
 Commonest site of perforation is terminal ileum
 Having found a perforation, look for others
 In the very ill patient, look for some type of extoriorisation
 Close the peritoneum and leave the wound open for secondary healing
SMALL BOWEL TUBERCULOSIS
Salient features
 Weight loss, chronic cough, malaise, evening rise of temperature with sweating, vague
abdominal pain with distension, alternating constipation and diahrrea.
 May present with features of peritonitis with perforation or obstruction. Doughy feel of
abdomen.
Investigations
 Hemogram shows anemia, raised ESR and CRP, positive sputum culture. Ultrasound of
abdomen shows localized collection.
 Chest X Ray show pulmonary infiltrates.
 Barium meal and follow through shows multiple small bowel strictures in ileum and
subhepatic caecum.
Surgical treatment
 Patient should ideally be treated under combined care of physician and surgeon. Vigorous
supportive and full drug treatment is mandatory in all cases. Symptomatic strictures are
treated by appropriate resections.
 Acute intestinal obstruction from distal illeal stricture is treated by thorough resuscitation
followed by side to side illeo-transverse bypass. Once the patient has recovered with medical
treatment, then the second stage definitive procedure of right hemicolectomy is done.
 One stage resection and anastomosis can be done if the patient’s general condition permits.
Perforation is treated by appropriate local resection and anastomosis or exteriorization if the
condition of the patient is very poor, that is later followed by restoration of bowel continuity
after patient is fully recovered of anti-tuberculous therapy.
336

Surgery
ANAL FISSURE
Salient features
 Constipation, sharp agonizing pain during defecation, bright streaks of blood in stools.
 Ulcer at the lower end of the anal canal seen when tightly closed puckered anus is
stretched apart.
Pharmacological treatment
 Lignocaine jelly or ointment (5%) applied locally 3-4 times a day;
 Tab. metronidazole 400 mg for 5 days, twice a day.
 Tab ibuprofen 400 mg one tablet 8 hourly
 Sitz bath (warm water with povidone iodine) twice a day
 Isapghula husk 1-2 teaspoon in water one or two times a day for control of constipation and
straining during defecation Or
 Liquid paraffin (5-15 ml) at bed time for one month, if no relief with local lignocaine,
application
Surgical treatment
 Aim of therapy is to cause complete relaxation of the anal sphincter that will relieve pain and
slowly heal the fissure.
 Anal dilation under general anaesthesia.
 Fissurectomy and sphincterotomy if needed.
FISTULA IN ANO
A fistula-in-ano is a hollow tract lined with granulation tissue, connecting a primary opening
inside the anal canal to a secondary opening in the perianal skin. Secondary tracts may be
multiple and can extend from the same primary opening. Fistula-in-ano is nearly always caused
by a previous anorectal abscess.
Salient features
 Patients often provide a reliable history of previous pain, swelling, and spontaneous or
planned surgical drainage of an anorectal abscess. Signs and symptoms of fistula-in-ano,
in order of prevalence, include the following perianal discharge, pain, swelling, bleeding,
diarrhea, skin excoriation, external opening
337

Surgery
Investigations
In selected cases of high fistula, multiple fistulae, and recurrent fistulae.
 Fistulography
 Endoanal/endorectal ultrasonography
 MRI
 Barium enema/small bowel series
 Anal manometry
 Examination under anesthesia
 Proctosigmoidoscopy/colonoscopy
Surgical treatment
 Treatment of underlying cause, if any-surgical procedure for eradication of tract
 Fistulotomyand fistulectomy
 Mucosal advancement flap
 Seton placement – the following conditions - complex fistulas (i.e., high transsphincteric,
suprasphincteric, extrasphincteric) or multiple fistulas
 Recurrent fistulas after previous fistulotomy
 Anterior fistulas in female patients
 Poor preoperative sphincter pressures
 Patients with Crohn’s disease or patients who are immunosuppressed
Patient education
 Most patients can be treated in an ambulatory setting with discharge instructions and close
follow-up care. Sitz baths, analgesics, and stool-bulking agents (eg, bran, psyllium products)
are used in follow-up care. Frequent office visits within the first few weeks help to ensure
proper healing and wound care.
HAEMORRHOIDS
Haemorrhoids (commonly called piles) are the dilated tortuous veins occurring in relation to the
anus. These can be primary or secondary to carcinoma of rectum, pregnancy, straining at
micturition,or constipation.Classified into external, internal or mixed (externo-internal).
Salient features
 Bleeding per rectum, pruritus ani, something coming out per rectum, constipation.
 Per rectal examination and proctoscopy shows haemmorrhoid with or without bleeding
points at 3,7,11 clock position. Grade I- punctuate bleeding , non protruding. Grade II-
protrudes during straining, reduces spontaneousl. Grade III- protrudes during straining needs
to be manually reduced. Grade IV – prolapsed haemorrhoids. No other diagnostic modality
needed other than proctoscopy
338

Surgery
Non pharmacological treatment
 High fiber diet
 Plenty of fluids
 Sitz bath-twice a day with lukewarm water
Pharmacological treatment
 Bulk forming laxative (esabgol husk),at bed time to relieve constipation.
 Local lignocaine 2% ointment if associated external haemorrhoids
Surgical measures
 Grade I-conservative management, injection sclerotherapy for bleeding hemmorrhoids.
 Grade II- conservative management and band ligation.
 Grade III/IV – hemorrhoidectomy.
DIABETIC FOOT
It is infection, ulceration and /or gangrene of foot due to diabetes and/or its complication.
Precipitating factors are moisture, trauma -mechanical causes like ill fitting shoes, in growing toe
nail, thorn prick, physical, heat, cold and infection.
Salient features
 Major factors are neuropathy, vasculopathy, infection.
 Minor factors are arch collapse, microcirculatory abnormality, glycosylation of skin
proteins, reduced host immunity, altered blood viscosity and rheological properties,
associoted renal oedema, hypertension induced vessel thickness, increased weight bearing
dueto obesity.
Clinical classification-Maggit's classifacation
Grade 0-foot symptoms without ulcer
Grade 1-superficial ulcer
Grade 2-deep ulcer
Grade 3-deep ulcer with bone involvement
Grade 4-forefoot gangrene
Grade 5-whole foot gangrene
Clinical classification of neuropathy
Category 1-no loss of sensation
Category2-loss of sensation
Category 3-loss of sensation with deformity
Category 4-loss of sensation with ulcers
339

Surgery
Investigations
Hb, TC, DC, Blood sugar-FBS,PPBS, BUN,S. creatinine, urine-sugar/ketone bodies.
Local X-ray foot, biopsy from the edge off ulcer, pus swab for culture and sensitivity, Doppler to
judge vascularity
Treatment
According to grade
 Grade 0: No specific treatment, take preventive measures to protect the limbs
 Grade 1: Prescribe special cushioned shoes to protect from pressure sore
 Grade 2: control of sugar, antibiotics according to culture reports, daily dressing and
debridement.
 Grade 3: Apart from the management described above , drainage of abscess or local
amputation
 Grade 4: Patients with forefoot gangrene require amputation
 Grade 5: Amputation and rehabilitation
VARICOSE VEINS
These are defined as tortuous dilated vein. Affect 5% or more of the adult population.
Salientfeatures
 Aching in the veins at the end of day, after prolong standing, ankle swelling, itching,
bleeding, superficial thrombophlebitis, eczema, lipodermatosclerosis and ulceration.
 Tortuous dilated vein are the in subcutaneous tissue indicative of vericose vein.
Varicocities in the thigh are indicative of long saphenous incompetence, whereas
varicosities of back of leg are suggestive of short saphenous incompetence.
Investigations
Brodie Trendelenberg test, tourniquet test, Perthe's test, Perthe's test (modified), Schwartz test,
Pratt's test, Morrissey's cough impulse test, Fegan's method to indicate the sites of perforators,
pitting oedema, thickening, redness, tenderness at lower part of leg, lipodermatosclerosis
Non pharmacological treatment
Reassurance, elastic compression stockings - 6” elastic compression stockings applied with
graduated pressure, foot end elevation
Pharmacological treatment
 Injection sclerotherapy
 Ultrasound guided foam sclerotherapy
Surgical treatment
 Saphenofemoral junction ligation and greater saphenous stripping with or without
incompetent perforator ligation
340

Surgery
 Saphenopopleteal junction ligation and lesser saphenous stripping with or without
incompetent perforator ligation
 Split thickness skin grafting for venous ulcers ,if present
DEEP VENOUS THROMBOSIS
A venous thrombus is the formation of a semisolid coagulum within flowing blood in the venous
system. Venous thrombosis of the deep veins of the leg is complicated by the immediate risk of
pulmonary embolus and sudden death.
Salient features
 Changes in the vessel wall (endothelial damage), stasis which is diminished blood flow
through the veins, coagulability of blood (thrombophilia).
 Pain and swelling in the calf of one of the lower limb, mild pitting oedema of ankle,
dilated surface veins, stiff calf and redness over the course of the deep veins, Homan's
sign; resistance (not pain) of the calf muscle to forcible dorsiflexion, low grade pyrexia.
Risk factors
Patient factor: age, obesity, varicose veins, immobility, pregnancy, puerperium, high dose
oestrogen therapy, previous deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism, thrombophilia
Disease or surgical procedure: trauma or surgery of pelvis , hip or lower limb, malignancy
especially pelvic, and abdominal metastatic, heart failure, recent myocardial infarction, paralysis
of lower limbs, infection, inflammatory bowel disease, nephrotic syndrome, polycythemia,
paraproteinemia, homocystinemia
Investigations
D-dimer, PT, APTT, duplex ultrasound
Pharmacological treatment
 Start with low molecular weight heparin anticoagulated with warfarin.
 Warfarin started at a dose of 10 mg on day one,10mg on day 2, 5mg on day three
 Patient taken on day three guides maintenence dose of warfarin
 Venous thrombectomy in severe cases.
 Venacaval filters in recurrent and high risk cases.
Prophylaxis
Mechanical methods-graduated elastic compression stockings, external pneumatic compression
stockings.
Low molecular weight heparin
CERVICAL LYMPHADENOPATHY
An enlargedcervical lymph node is the commonest cause of lump in the neck. Cervical lymph
nodes may become enlarged as a result of inflammationor neoplastic process. Tuberculosisis is
341

Surgery
oneofthecommonest causesofcervicallymphadenopathy(Table 2).
Table 2. Causes and clinical features of cervical lymphadenopathy
Condition Causes Clinical features
Acute inflammation Infection of the digestive tract, head Fever ,sore throat,
and neck or other Firm tender 1-2 cm diameter
nodes
Chronic inflammation Tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, Swelling in the neck, firm,
Histiocytosis X matted , fever may or may
not be present
Lymphomas Hodgkins / Non Hodgkins Large painless rubbery
lymphoma lymph nodes.
Metastatic Carcinomas of the upper digestive Symptoms related to primary
tract, , skin tumours of the head and disease,
neck: squamous cell carcinoma, basal
cell carcinoma, melanoma
Salient features
 Detailed history and examination are essential to pinpoint specific etiology.
 Majority of the lymph nodes are reactive to viral infections of upper respiratory tract,
therefore,do not requireanytreatment.
Pharmacological treatment
 In case of acute suppurative lymphadenopathy secondary to any focus of bacterial
infectionin the drainagearea: Cap. cephalexin250-500 mg every 6 hours for 7 days or Cap.
amoxicillin250-500mgevery8hours for7days.
 If lymph nodes persist, perform fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) and treat
accordingly. If FNAC is non-conclusive take a biopsy from the enlarged lymph node and
treataccordingly.
 In case of chronic lymphadenopathyperform FNAC and treat accordingly. If FNAC is non-
conclusive,performbiopsy and treataccordingly.
Treatment of tubercular lymphhadenopathy
 Startanti-tuberculartherapy
 Reassess the patient after 6 months. If lymph nodes are either not present or lessthan 1cm
size, keep the patient under follow-up and continue treatment. However, if lymph nodes are
palpable and more than 1 cm, take a biopsy of the node and treat accordinglyand consider
second line antitubercular drugs.
342

Surgery
THYROID NODULE
 The normal thyroid gland is impalpable. The term goitre is used for generalized enlargement
of thyroid gland. A discrete swelling in one lobe with no palpable abnormality elsewhere is
termed as isolated or solitary swelling. Discrete swellings with evidence of abnormality
elsewhere in the gland is termed as dominant
 Cause are physiological, puberty, pregnancy, Grave's disease, multinodular, toxic adenoma,
neoplastic, benign, malignant, inflammatory, autoimmune, chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis,
Hashimoto's disease, granulomatous, de Quervain 's thyroiditis, fibrosing Riedel's thyroiditis.
Infective can be acute (bacterial, viral) or chronic (tubercular, syphilitic), other amyloid
etiologyand iodine deficiency.
Salient features
 The patient is euthyroid, the nodules are palpable often visible( smooth, firm),painless
and moves with swallowing.
Investigations
Thyroid function test, autoantibody titre, isotope scan, ultrasonography, FNAC, CT scan, MRI,
PET scan, laryngoscopy and core biopsy
Prevention and treatment of simple goiter
 Iodised salt
 In hyperplastic goiter, thyroxine 0.15-0.2mg daily for two months
 Multinodular goiter total or subtotal thyroidectomy. after subtotal resection, thyroxine is
given to suppress TSH secretion
Surgical treatment
 Total thyroidectomy = total lobectomy + isthmusectomy
 Subtotal thyroidectomy = subtotal lobectomy + isthmusectomy
 Near total thyroidectomy = total lobectomy + isthmusectomy + subtotal lobectomy
 Lobectomy = total lobectomy + isthmusectomy
HYPERTHYROIDISM
Salient features
 Tiredness, emotional lability, weight loss, excessive appetite, palpitation, tachycardia, hot
moist palms, exopthalmos, lid lag/retraction, agitation, thyroid goitre and bruit
Investigations
Thyroid function test: normal T4, suppressed TSH, thyroid scan
Non pharmacological treatment
Rest and sedation
343

Surgery
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. carbimazole 10 mg four times a day, when patient becomes euthyroid and maintenance
dose of 5 mg two or three times a day for 6-24 months
Surgical treatment
 Large toxic multinoduler goiter -total thyroidectomy
 Large diffuse toxic goiter - Promote elective surgery after a course of treatment with
antithyroid drugs and beta blocker. A subtotal thyroidectomy is performed.
 Toxic solitary nodular goitre /toxic adenoma/autonomous hot nodule-hemithyroidectomy
 Thyrotoxicosis in pregnancy- subtotal thyroidectomy in mid trimester
 Hashimoto’s disease/lymphedenoid goiter-total thyroidectomy or total lobectomy
BENIGN BREAST DISEASES
It may be cyclical or noncyclical mastalgia and benign breast lump (fibroadenoma)
Salient features
 Noncyclical usually of chest wall origin and more common in peri-menopausal women.
 Cyclical mastalgia is common in child bearing age.
 Benign lumpiness may be bilateral present in upper outer quadrant may confined to one
quadrant. Increases before menstrual period.
 Fibroadenoma presents as benign discreet lump
Investigations
Ultrasound of breast and axilla, mammography for patients above 35 years of age.
FNAC may show fibroadenoma or changes of fibroadenosis.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Reassurance
 Adequate support
 Exclusion of caffeine in some patients
 Evening primrose oil 1000 mg TDS for 3 months
 If does not respond, Tab. danazol 100 mg OD, can be increased upto TDS after discussing
side effects of the drugs to the patient (hirtuism, contraception failure)
 For fibroadenoma, no treatment is required. Excision is done on patient’s will, suspicious
cytology or large (>5 cm ) lump
BREAST ABSCESS
Usually the abscess is superficial but deep ones, when they occur, are more difficult to diagnose
and to treat.
344

Surgery
Pharmacological treatment
Early in the infection, non-surgical measures should be applied
 Tab. amoxicillin (PO) : 1-2 gm/ d divided in 2-3 doses for 5 days or
 Cap. ampicillin (PO) : 2-4 gm/ d divided in 2-3 doses for 5 days
 Tab. ibuprofen 400 mg thrice daily.
Non pharmacological treatment
 Apply constricting bandage, stop breast-feeding from this side
 Expression of milk with a breast pump to avoid engorgement.
Surgical treatment
 For superficial abscess: radial incision.
 For abscess near nipple: peri-alveolar incision.
 For deep abscess: beneath the breast
 Gentle exploration with finger or Kelly forceps. Abundant lavage with chlorhexidine-
cetrimide solution. Insertion of a corrugated drain.
CARCINOMA BREAST
Carcinoma of breast is most common malignancy in female population world wide and second
most common in India.
Salient features
 Middle age female, lump in breast and/or axilla, skin changes over breast, nipple
discharge, weight loss.
 Examination of breast as whole with nipple areola complex. Examination of axilla as well
as theopposite breast and axilla.
Investigations
Mammography, look for the non palpable lesion in same breast as well as base line investigation
in opposite breast. FNAC, true cut biopsy, excisional biopsy if mass < 4 cm in size, incisional
biopsy if mass > 4 cm size
Surgical treatment
 Modified radical mastectomy is removal of whole breast tissue with nipple areola complex,
skin overlying lump, pectoral fascia and axillary dissection.
 For Stage II B, Stage III A: Breast conservative surgery along with radiotherapy
 Lumpectomy/quadrentectomy/wide excision is indicated in solitary lump, tumor size < 4 cm,
not involving nipple areola complex
 DCIS for Stage I, Stage II A
345

Surgery
Pharmacological treatment
 Neo adjuvant chemotherapy: Adjuvant chemotherapy given before surgery for down staging
of locally advanced breast cancer, Stage III B
 Adjuvant chemotherapy: Post operative chemotherapy for
- all node positive cancers
- node negative cancer, > 1 cm in size
- node negative cancer, > 0.5 cm with adverse prognostic factors
- (lymphovascular invasion, high nuclear grade, high histological grade, HER 2/neu over
expression, negative hormone receptor status)
 Commonly used regimen for chemotherapy are-
- CMF regimen: cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, 5-fluorouracil- 6 cycle, every 21 days
- CAF regimen: cyclophosphamide, adriamycin, 5- Fluorouracil 6 cycle, every 21 days
- Cyclophosphamide: 600 mg/ sqm body area IV
- 5 Fluorouracil: 600 mg/sqm body area IV
- Methotrexate: 40 mg/sqm body area IV
- Adriamycin: 50 mg/sqm body area IV
Hormonal regimen
Tab. tamoxifen 20 mg orally daily, 5 years given to ER/PR positive patients.
RENAL STONES
Renal stones are common in India and are caused because of low fluid intake, high salt
concentrate in water. Vitamin A deficiency, renal infections, inadequate urinary drainage and
urinary stasis, prolonged immobilization, hyperparathyroidism are also the common causes.
Types of stone: Oxalate stones, phosphate stones, uric acid stones (radiolucent stones), cystine
stones, xanthine stones
Salient features
 Salient calculus, colicky pain in lumbar region of the affected side, worsened by
movements. hematuria, burning micturition.
 Rigidity of lateral abdominal muscles but not the rectus abdominis. Tenderness in lumbar
region
Investigations
X ray KUB, ultrasonographyof KUB, intravenous urography, CT- IVP
Pharmacological treatment
 Inj. diclofenac sodium 3 ml IM stat
 Inj. dicyclomine 2 ml IM stat
 Tab. ciprofloxacin 500 mg BD for 5 days
346

Surgery
 Potassium citrate 5 ml in 100 ml of water 3-4 times/day
 Calculi less than 5 mm can pass spontaneously and require no surgical intervention
Non pharmacological treatment
High fluid intake is advised with avoidance of lithogenic food and beverages
Surgical treatment
Kidney stones
 Percutaneus nephrolithotomy (PCNL)
 Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL)
 Open pyelolithotomy
 Nephrolithotomy
Ureteric stones
 Endoscopic removal by uretero renoscopy, dormia basket, ureteric meaotomy or open
ureterolithotomy
URINARY RETENTION
Urinary retention, also known as ischuria, is a lack of ability to urinate. It is a common
complication of BPH- Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia.
Salient features
 It is also be caused by neurogenic bladder (commonly pelvic splanchic nerve damage,
cauda equina syndrome, descending cortical fibers lesion, pontine micturation or storage
center lesions) or can be iatrogenic in nature (caused by medical treatment/procedure),
scarring of the bladder neck (commonly from removal of indwelling catheters or
cystoscopy operations) ordamage to the bladder
 In the prostate the causes may be BPH, prostate cancer and other pelvic malignancies,
prostatitis.
 In urethra- congenital urethral valves , phimosis or pinhole meatus, obstruction in the
urethra, for example a stricture (usually caused either by injury or STD), a metastasis or a
precipitated pseudo gout crystal in the urine
 STD lesions (gonorrhoea causes numerous strictures, leading to a "rosary bead"
appearance, whereas chlamydia usually causes a single stricture)
 Inability to pass urine, thinning of urinary stream, dribbling of urine, pain in infraumbilical
region or palpable urinary bladder above pubic symphysis is seen.
Treatment
 Insertion of a low diameter (10 to 12 French) urinary catheter or
 Insertion of Infant Feeding Tube (IFT, 5 to 7 French diameter) or
 Suprapubic catheterisation (SPC)
347