Chapter 17
RESPIRATORY DISEASES
COMMUNITY ACQUIRED PNEUMONIA
Community acquired pneumonia (CAP) can be defined as inflammation of lung parenchyma
due to infection by Streptococcus pneumonia followed by Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella
pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae. Atypical organisms include Mycoplasma,
Chlamydia and certain respiratory viruses.
Salient features
 Symptoms of acute lower respiratory tract illness (cough with or without
expectoration, shortness of breath, pleuritic chest pain) for less than 1 week
 Temperature >37.7ºC, chills with rigors, and/or severe malaise
 Chest signs- bronchial breath sounds and/or crackles); with no other explanation for
the illness.
Investigations
 Chest X ray in all patients suspected with CAP. It should be repeated if the patient is not
improvingorhavingpersistence or worsening of symptoms/physical signs.
 Centrilobular nodules favore non-bacterial pneumonia, while airspace nodules are
common with bacterial pneumonia.
 CT of the chest should be performed in those with non-resolving pneumonia and for the
assessment of complications of CAP.
 Legionella urinary antigen test is desirable in patients with severe CAP.
Pharmacological treatment
Initial empirical antibiotic therapy may be useful in severe disease, co-morbid conditions like
chronic heart, lung or renal diseases, diabetes mellitus, malignancies and immune-
compromised conditions. The antibiotic can then be modified as per the response and sputum
culture. The choice of the empirical antibiotic,
Outpatients
 Previously healthy and no antibiotics in past 3 months
A macrolide [clarithromycin (500 mg orally BD) or azithromycin (500 mg orally once,
then 250 mg qd)] ordoxycycline (100 mg orally BD) for 7 to 14 days
 Co-morbidities or antibiotics in past 3 months: select an alternative from a different class
Co-morbidities like alcohol consumption, leucopenia, congestive heart failure, coronary
artery disease, diabetes mellitus, immune-compromised state and increasing age.
Fluoroquinolones [levofloxacin (750 mg orally OD) or moxifloxacin (400 mg orally OD)]
for 10 to 14 days or
beta-lactams [high-dose amoxicillin (1 g TDS) or amoxicillin/clavulanate (2 g TDS);
348

Respiratory Diseases
 Alternatives: ceftriaxone (1–2 g IV OD), cefpodoxime (200 mg orally BD), cefuroxime
(500 mg orally BD)] plus macrolide [clarithromycin (500 mg orally BD) or azithromycin
(500 mg orally once, then 250 mg OD)] for 10 to 14 days
Inpatients, Non-ICU
 A respiratory fluoroquinolone [levofloxacin (750 mg oral or IV OD), moxifloxacin (400
mg oral or IV OD)] for 10 to 14 days
 Alternatively beta-lactams [cefotaxime (1–2 g IV TDS), ceftriaxone (1–2 g IV OD),
ampicillin (1–2 g IV every 4–6 hourly), ertapenem (1 g IV OD in selected patients)] plus
macrolide [oral clarithromycin or azithromycin (as listed above for previously healthy
patients) or IV azithromycin (1gm once then 500 mg daily)] – parentally for 5 to 7 days
and then after orally for 10 days
Inpatients, ICU
 Beta-lactams [cefotaxime (1–2 g IV TDS), ceftriaxone (2 g IV OD), ampicillin-sulbactam
(2 g IV TDS)] for 5 to 7 days plus azithromycin or fluoroquinolone (as listed above for
inpatients, non-ICU) for 5 to 7 days and to continue after discharge oral medication for 10
days
Special concerns
 If Pseudomonas is a considered,
An antipseudomonal beta-lactam [piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g IV QID), cefepime (1–2
g IV BD), imipenem (500 mg IV QID), meropenem (1 g IV TDS)] plus either
ciprofloxacin (400 mg IV BD) or levofloxacin (750 mg IV OD) or aminoglycoside
[amikacin (15 mg/kg OD) or tobramycin (1.7 mg/kg OD)]
 If CA-MRSA (methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus) is a considered - Add
linezolid (600 mg IV BD) or vancomycin (1 g IV BD). Total duration in above situations
is 14 days including IV for 5 days and oral medication for remaining period.
Recommendations for use of steroids in CAP- They should be used in septic shock or
ARDS secondary to CAP.
Monitoring
- Antimicrobial therapy should be changed according to the specific pathogen(s)
isolated.
- Diagnostic/therapeutic interventions should be done for complications e.g.
thoracocentesis, chest tube drainage, etc as required.
- If a patient does not respond to treatment within 48-72 hours, he/she should be
evaluated for the cause of non-response including development of complications,
presence of atypical pathogens, drug resistance, etc.
- Non- invasive ventilation should be used in patients with CAP and acute respiratory
failure.
349

Respiratory Diseases
Follow up
 Switch to oral from IV therapy if the patient shows improvement in moderate to severe
CAP.
 Patient can be considered for discharge after they start accepting drugs orally, are
afebrile, and hemodynamically stable for a period of at least 48 hr
HOSPITAL ACQUIRED PNEUMONIA
Hospital Acquired Pneumonia (HAP) is an inflammatory condition of lung parenchyma
caused by infectious agents, neither present nor incubating at time of hospital admission. It is
defined as pneumonia developing 48 h after admission to the hospital. It can be caused by a
wide range of pathogens including gram negative bacilli such as P.aeruginosa, E.coli,
K.pneumoniae and Acinobacter. Ventilator Associated Pneumonia (VAP) is defined as
pneumonia (new onset of fever) that develops after 48 hour of endotracheal intubation.
Salient features
New or progressive radiological deterioration along with any two below
 New onset of fever, purulent discharge, leukocytosis and decline in oxygenation, purulent
sputum, orincreased respiratory secretions, dyspnea or tachypnoea
 Altered mental status
 Patients with Acute respiartory distress syndrome (ARDS) as harboring VAP if sustained
increase in PEEP requirement >2.5 cm H O after being stable or decreasing or Fraction of
2
inspired oxygen (Fio ) requirement rise by > 0.15 after being stable or decreasing.
2
 High risk for developing HAP/VAP e.g. chronic cardiovascular, pulmonary, renal or liver
disease, diabetes mellitus, CSF leak, asplenia, immunocompromised condition/medication,
influenza, compromised respiratory function or increased aspiration risk.
 Blood should be sent for culture prior to antibiotics. However, appropriate management
should not be delayed in clinically unstable patients for purpose of performing diagnostic
sampling.
Pharmacological treatment
Risk factors for pneumonia: Age >60 years, male gender, smoking, alcohol intake,
underling disease, inspired O2 >0.50, renal failure/dialysis, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, airway instrumentation, aspiration before intubation, tracheostomy, mechanical
ventilation >2 days, coma, head trauma, continuous enteral feeding, prior antibiotics,
nosocomial maxillary sinusitis, repeat intensive care unit admission
Patients without riskfactors for MDR pathogens (Treatment duration is 10 to 14 days)
ceftriaxone (2 g IV OD) or moxifloxacin (400 mg IV OD), ciprofloxacin (400 mg IV TDS),
or levofloxacin (750 mg IV OD)or ampicillin/sulbactam (3 g IV QID)
Patients with riskfactors for MDR Pathogens (Treatment duration is 10 to 14 days)
350

Respiratory Diseases
1. Beta-lactams: ceftazidime (2 g IV TDS) or cefepime (2 g IV BD/TDS) or
piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g IV QID), imipenem (500 mg IV QID or 1 g IV TDS), or
meropenem (1 g IV TDS) plus
2. A second agent active against gram-negative bacteria pathogens: gentamicin or
tobramycin (7 mg/kg IV OD) or amikacin (20 mg/kg IV OD) or ciprofloxacin (400 mg IV
TDS) or levofloxacin (750 mg IV OD) plus
3. An agent active against gram-positive bacteria pathogens: linezolid (600 mg IV BD) or
vancomycin (15 mg/kg, up to 1 g IV, BD)
Follow up
 Clinical improvement usually evident within 48–72 h of the initiation of antimicrobial
treatment. Because findings on chest radiography often worsen initially during treatment,
they are less helpful than clinical criteria as an indicator of clinical response in severe
pneumonia.
 Seriously ill patients with pneumonia, often undergo follow-up chest radiography daily, at
least until they are being weaned off mechanical ventilation. Once a patient has been
extubated and is in stable condition, follow-up radiographs may not be necessary for a
few weeks
Patient education (to reduce the frequency of nosocomial pneumonia in mechanically
ventilated patients)
 General methods: Aggressive treatment of patient’s underlying disease, Review need and
avoid antacids and H blockers for stress ulcer prophylaxis, keep patient elevated at ≥ 30º,
2
review nutrition regimen and tube feeding procedures, extubate and remove nasogastric
tube as clinically indicated, controlled use of antibiotics.
 Respiratory care equipment: Discriminate between equipment with nebulizers and
humidifiers ≥48-h circuit changes (tubing and humidifier) for mechanical ventilators with
humidifiers; no changes for circuits with heat-moisture exchangers, proper removal of
respiratory tubing condensate and education of staff to prevent washing contaminated
condensate into the patient’s trachea, no transfer of equipment or devices between
patients, review use and care of in-line medication nebulizers.
 Infection control: Surveillance in the ICU education and awareness programs on
nosocomial infection, handwashing and/or barrier precautions, review technique for
suctioning patients; type of catheter used, review method of condensate disposal, use
effective methods of disinfection of devices and equipment, consider selective
decontamination of the digestive tract with oral nonabsorbable antibiotics to prevent
nosocomial infection.
BRONCHIAL ASTHMA
Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways characterized by episode of
wheezing, breathlessness, chest tightness and coughing, particularly at night or in the early
351

Respiratory Diseases
morning. It is associated with widespread but variable airflow obstruction that is often
reversible either spontaneously or with treatment.
Salient features
 Precipitating allergens are dust, pollen, fish, nuts, strawberries, cold air, tobacco smoke,
viral and bacterial infections, exercise, emotional stress and drugs like NSAIDs, aspirin,
beta-blocker
 Classical symptoms include cough, breathlessness, chest tightness and wheezing. Signs
include tachypnoea, tachycardia, pulsus paradoxus, use of accessory muscles, silent chest
Diagnosis
 When asthma is suspected and other disorders have been ruled out (e.g. tumours in adults,
foreign body in children; don’t assume the presence of wheeze means asthma), confirm
the diagnosis with pulmonary function tests (PFTs).
 PFTs suffice as objective evidence of variable airflow obstruction:
A 12 % or greater improvement in forced expiratory volume (FEV1) in children and
adults, and > 200 ml in adults from the baseline 15 minutes after use of an inhaled
-
short-acting beta2 agonist.
Serial measures of peak expiratory flow (PEF): A > 20% change after administration
of a bronchodilator.
-
 When there is some probability of asthma and the above tests are non-diagnostic, the
following tests may be used to help diagnosis of asthma:
Methacholine challenge
Exercise challenge
-
Inhaled corticosteroid trial: appropriate doses of inhaled steroids for 4-6 weeks
-
Raised value of absolute eosinophil count (>6-8%)
-
Non pharmacological treatment
-
 Evaluate and assess impact and exposure to allergens and irritants in individual patients.
 Complete cessation of smoking and avoidance of environmental tobacco smoke is
strongly recommended.
 Lifestyle management-refer patients to an asthma education program where available.
Pharmacological treatment
 If expiratory flows are normal and symptoms are controlled, an inhaled short-acting beta2
agonist as needed.
 If rescue beta2 agonist is needed more than 2 times per week (excluding preventative use
prior to exercise) or if lung function is abnormal, an inhaled glucocorticosteroid used.
 Use of spacer: Technically, the most efficient way to maximize inhaled drug delivery to
the lungs is through a metered dose inhaler (MDI) and spacing device. For adults,
however, a dry powdered inhaler (DPI) has demonstrated efficacy and is more convenient
352

Respiratory Diseases
for most people. If using an inhaled corticosteroid MDI, a spacer device, in addition to
usual oral hygiene, will minimize the risk of oral thrush.
Step wise control of chronic asthma in patients more than 6 years of age (Table 1)
 Patient should start treatment at the step most appropriate to the initial severity of their
asthma.
 At each step, review medication adherence, inhaler technique, and patient education.
Reconsider diagnosis if no or poor response to therapy.
 If symptom control is maintained over 3 months, consider stepping down to the least
medication necessary to maintain control.
Table 1. Step wise control of chronic asthma in patients more than 6 years of age
Step 1 Inhaled short-acting beta2 agonist (SABA) as required.
Step 2 Add inhaled corticosteroid (ICS). In children age 6-11 years, start at a low dose.
Add inhaled long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA) in combination with an ICS.
Assess control of asthma:
 Good response to LABA/ICS combination ➞ continue
Step 3  Benefit from LABA/ICS combination but control still inadequate ➞ continue
LABA and increase steroid dose to high dose ICS
 No response to LABA/ICS combination ➞ stop LABA combination and
continue high dose inhaled steroid and proceed to Step 4
Consider the following:
 A short course of oral corticosteroids may be used in adults (i.e. prednisone
0.6 mg/kg/day for 5 days) to stabilize the patient
Step 4
 Referring patient for specialist care
 Adding a third drug (e.g. leukotriene receptor antagonist, theophylline, or low
dose daily oral steroids)
Table 2 showing control of asthma
Controlled Partly controlled
Characteristic (all of the (any measure Uncontrolled
following) present in any week)
None More than
Daytime symptom
(twice or less/wk) twice/week
Limitation of activities None Any
Nocturnal symptom Three or more
None Any
/awakening feature of
Need for reliever/rescue None More than partly
treatment (twice or less/wk) twice/week controlled
< 80% predicted or asthma present
Lung function
Normal personal best (if in any week
(PEF of FEV1)*
known)
One in any
Exacerbation None One or more/year †
week‡
* Lungfunction testing is not reliable for children 5 years and younger.
353

Respiratory Diseases
† Any exacerbation should prompt review of maintenance treatment to ensure that it is
adequate.
‡ By definition, an exacerbation in any week makes that an uncontrolled asthma week.
Table 3. Drugs and recommended dosage
Children (6-11 years) mcg per
Adult (mcg per day)
day
Drugs
Low Medium High (Max) Low Medium High (Max)
Beclomethasone
≤ 250 251-500 > 500 (800) ≤ 100 101-200b > 200 (200)
dipropionate pMDI
Budesonide DPI ≤ 400 401-800 >800 (2400) ≤ 200 201-400b > 400 (400)
Ciclesonide pMDI ≤ 200 201-400 > 400 (800) 100 101-200b > 200 (200)
Fluticasone
≤ 250 251-500 > 500 (2000) ≤ 100 101-200b > 200 (400)
priopionate pMDI
Fluticasone
≤ 250 251-500 > 500 (2000) ≤ 100 101-200b > 200 (400)
PriopionateDPI
Follow up
 An action plan to increase therapy when asthma is not controlled and to decrease therapy
when asthma is well controlled
 Periodically discuss adequacy of asthma control with the patient. Identify and eliminate
barriers to effective control.
 Consider measuring peak flow at each visit.
 Encourage the patient/family to actively manage their illness.
 If a patient is not responding to therapy, and compliance and inhaler technique is
appropriate, consider an alternative diagnosis and/or referral for further assessment. .
Patient education
 Proper use of prescribed medication, techniques of administration, what constitutes
“control” of asthma and how to monitor control with PEF measurement or symptom
monitoring.
 Discuss strategies to assist patients to stop smoking and refer patients to smoking
cessation programs.
CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is defined as “A preventable and treatable
disease characterized by persistent airflow limitation that is not fully reversible. The airflow
limitation is usually progressive and associated with an abnormal inflammatory response of
354

Respiratory Diseases
the lung to noxious particles or gases with some significant extra pulmonary effects that may
contribute to the severity in the individual patient”.
Salient features
 Chronic cough, which may be daily and productive, but can also be intermittent and
unproductive. Breathlessness on exertion, initially intermittent and becoming persistent
 Sputum production: any pattern of sputum production may indicate COPD. Frequent
exacerbations of bronchitis
 A history of exposure to risk factors, especially tobacco smoke, occupational dusts,
home cooking and biomass fuels.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by spirometry and severity classified as per GOLD (Guidelines for
Obstructive Lung Diseases) criteria(Table 4).
Table 4. GOLD criteria for severity of COPD
GOLD
Severity Symptoms Spirometry
Stage
Chronic cough, sputum
0 At Risk Normal
production
With or without chronic FEV1/FVC <0.7 and FEV1 80%
I Mild
cough or sputum production predicted
With or without chronic FEV1/FVC <0.7 and 50% FEV1 <80%
IIA Moderate
cough or sputum production predicted
With or without chronic FEV1/FVC <0.7 and 30% FEV1 <50%
III Severe
cough or sputum production predicted
FEV1/FVC <0.7 and FEV1 <30%
Very With or without chronic predicted or
IV
Severe cough or sputum production FEV1 <50% predicted with respiratory
failure or signs of right heart failure
Non pharmacological treatment
 General Medical Care - Patients with COPD should receive the influenza vaccine
annually. Polyvalent pneumococcal vaccine is also recommended, although proof of
efficacyis not definitive.
 Pulmonary Rehabilitation-This refers to a treatment program that incorporates education
and cardiovascular conditioning. In COPD, pulmonary rehabilitation has been
demonstrated to improve health-related quality of life, dyspnea, and exercise capacity and
reduce rates of hospitalization over a 6-to 12-month period.
 Lung Volume Reduction Surgery (LVRS) offers both a mortality benefit and a
symptomatic benefit in certain patients with emphysema. Patients with upper lobe–
355

Respiratory Diseases
predominant emphysema and a low post rehabilitation exercise capacity are most likely to
benefit from LVRS.
 Lung Transplantation - COPD is currently the second leading indication for lung
transplantation Current recommendations are that candidates for lung transplantation
should be <65 years; have severe disability despite maximal medical therapy; and be free
of co-morbid conditions such as liver, renal, or cardiac disease.
Pharmacological treatment (Table 5)
 Bronchodilators- Used for symptomatic benefit in patients with COPD. The inhaled route
is preferred for medication delivery as the incidence of side effects is lower than that seen
with the use of parenteral medication delivery.
 Theophylline produces modest improvements in expiratory flow rates and vital capacity
and a slight improvement in arterial oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in patients with
moderate to severe COPD. Nausea is a common side effect; tachycardia and tremor have
also been reported. Monitoring of blood theophylline levels is typically required to
minimize toxicity.
 Supplemental oxygen is the only pharmacologic therapy demonstrated to unequivocally
decrease mortality rates in patients with COPD. Patients with resting hypoxemia (resting
O saturation 88% or <90% with signs of pulmonary hypertension or right heart failure)
2
require continual oxygen supplementation. Various delivery systems are available,
including portable systems that patients may carry to allow mobility outside the home.
Supplemental O are commonly prescribed for patients with exertional hypoxemia or
2
nocturnal hypoxemia.
 Glucocorticoids are not routinely recommended.
 Other agents that can be used as follows: N-acetyl cysteine 600 mg TDS for 10 to 14 days
Table 5. Commonly used drugs and dosages for pharmacotherapy of stable COPD
Drug category Recommended dose
Inhaled agents *
 Anti-cholinergics
-Short acting Ipratropium bromide 20-40 µg as needed
- Long acting Tiotropium 18 µg once daily
 Beta-agonists
-Short acting Salbutamol 100-200 µg as needed
Levosalbutamol 45-90 µg as needed
Terbutaline 250-500 µg as needed
- Long acting Salmeterol 25-50 µg twice daily
Formoterol 6-12 µg twice daily
Indaceterol 150-300 µg once daily
356

Respiratory Diseases
 Corticosteroids
-Fluticasone 25-500 µg twice daily
-Budesonide 100-400 µgtwice daily
-Beclomethasone 100-400 µg twice daily
-Ciclesonide 80-160 µg twice daily
-Mometasone 25-500 µg twice daily
Oral agents
 Beta-agonists
-Salbutamol 2-4 mg twice/thrice daily
-Bambuterol 10-20 mg once daily
-Terbutaline 2.5-5mg TDS
 Methylxanthines
-Sustained release theophylline 100-400 mg once daily
-Doxophylline 400 mg twice/thrice daily
* Recommended doses are those for a MDI. These drugs are also available in DPI and for
nebulizer use, for which doses may vary.
 Only three interventions—smoking cessation, oxygen therapy in chronically hypoxemic
patients, and lung volume reduction surgery in selected patients with emphysema—have
been demonstrated to influence the natural history of patients with COPD.
 All other therapies are directed at improving symptoms and decreasing the frequency and
severity of exacerbations. The institution of these therapies should involve an assessment
of symptoms, potential risks, costs, and benefits of therapy.
Acute exacerbation of COPD (Table 6)
 An exacerbation of COPD is an acute event characterized by a sustained worsening of
any of the patient’s respiratory symptoms (cough, sputum quantity and/or character,
dyspnea) that is beyond normal day-to-day variation and leads to a change in medication,
and where other causes of acute breathlessness have been clinically excluded.
Table 6. Severity assessment (indications for hospitalization) of exacerbation of COPD
Symptoms
 Marked reduction in activity of daily living due to dyspnea
 Altered sensorium
 New onset cyanosis
Signs
 Use of accessory respiratory muscles
 Paradoxical chest wall movements
 Central cyanosis
 Systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg
357

Respiratory Diseases
 RR >30/minute
 Heart rate >110/minute
 Asterixis
 Altered mental status
Others
 Presence ofsevere comorbid conditions
 Lack of social support
Pulse oximetry
 SpO <90%
2
* Presence of any of these qualifies a patient with need for admission. The ultimate decision
to admit depends on the overall clinical assessment of the physician
Treatment of acute exacerbations
Pharmacological treatment
Bronchodilators
Corticosteroids
-
Antibiotics: First line (Tab. amoxicillin 500-1000 mg TDS or Cap. doxycycline 100
-
mg BD or Tab. azithromycin 500 mg OD); Second line: Tab. amoxicillin/clavulanic
-
acid (625 mgTDS) or second-generation or third-generation cephalosporin (e.g. Tab.
cefixime 200 mg BD) All antibiotics need to be administered for 5-7 days except
azithromycin (three days)
Adjunct therapies
 Non-pharmacological treatment
-
Oxygen therapy
Ventilatorysupport (Noninvasive and invasive ventilation) (Table 7 and 8)
-
Table 7:Indications, protocol and parameters of failure of non invasive ventilation in
-
acute exacerbation of COPD
Indications
 Respiratory acidosis (arterial pH≤ 7.35 and/or PaCO 45 mmHg)
2
 Severe dyspnea
 Respiratory rate > 30 breaths/ min
 Use of accessory muscles of respiration
 Presence of paradoxical breathing
Protocol
 Full face mask better tolerated in the acute setting
 Start with an inspiratory pressure support of 6-8 cm H O and CPAP of3-4 cm H O
2 2
 Adjustments
358

Respiratory Diseases
- Increase inspiratory pressure and CPAP by 2 and 1 cm H O respectively
2
- Titrate to tidal volume (>5 ml/kg), respiratory rate (<35 breaths/minute) and blood
gases
- Maximum inspiratory pressure and CPAP generally used is 15-16 cm H O and 7-8
2
cm H O respectively
2
 Air leaks should be minimized
Parameters for failure of NIV
 Failure in improvement of clinical parameters and gas exchange at 1 hour
 Development of alteration in sensorium
 Hemodynamic instability
 Inability to tolerate oronasal mask
Table 8. Indications and protocol of invasive mechanical ventilation#
Indications
 pH≤7.25
 Unable to tolerate NIV/or NIV failure
 Respiratory or cardiac arrest
 Massive aspiration
 Diminished consciousness
 Failure to handle secretions
 Heart rate <50/minute with loss of alertness
 Hemodynamic instability without fluid responsiveness
 Severe ventricular arrhythmias
 Life threatening hypoxia
Protocol
Mode V-ACMV
Initial tidal volumes 4-6 ml/kg
Respiratory rate 8-12/min
PEEP 5-8 cm H O
2
I:E 1:3-1:6
Flow waveform Square waveform
Goals
Plateau pressure 30 cm H O
2
PaO 55-60 mm Hg
2
pH 7.2-7.4
#Modified from GOLD 2013
359

Respiratory Diseases
Criteria for hospital discharge (Modified from GOLD 2013)
 Able to use long acting bronchodilators. Inhaled short acting drugs no more than every 4
hours
 Patient if previously ambulatory-able to move across room, to eat and get adequate sleep
 Patient is clinically stable for at least 24 hours
Follow up
 Motivation to quit smoking
 Assessment of inhaler technique
 Measurement of FEV1
 Compliance with recommended treatment regimen
 Reassessing the need for long-term oxygen therapy and/or home nebulizer
 Status of co-morbidities
BRONCHIECTASIS
Bronchiectasis is present when one or more bronchi are abnormally and permanently dilated.
Salient features
 A preponderance of bronchiectasis on the left side and in the lower lobes has been noted.
 Bronchiectasis is classified based on the pathological changes into: follicular, saccular and
atelectatic types.
 Patient usually presents with persistent cough productive of distressingly copious volumes of
mucopurulent and sometimes fetid sputum, in a breathless and chronically disabled patient.
 Mild cases of bronchiectasis often have no abnormal physical signs. When the disease is
sufficiently developed, the characteristic finding is persistent early and mid-inspiratory
crackles which are localized to one or more areas so that they are heard at the same site or
sites on repeated examination. These crackles are frequently described as ‘coarse’ (as
opposed to ‘fine’) and are not shifted by coughing.
 Clubbing of the fingers and/or toes is a feature of gross disease with prolonged bronchial
infection. There may also be cyanosis, with signs of pulmonary hypertension and right heart
failure in such patients.
Diagnosis
 Clinical feature with radiological presentation of plain x-ray chest and a very specific
High resolution computed tomography (HRCT)thorax pattern.
 Plain chest radiographic features include evidence of dilated bronchi, parallel “tramlines”,
solid tubular opacities, appearances of pulmonary hypertension.
 HRCT has become the investigation of choice in bronchiectasis (Table 9).
360

Respiratory Diseases
Table 9. HRCT findings in bronchiectesis
Direct signs Indirect signs
Bronchial dilatation Bronchial wall thickening
Increased bronchoarterial ratio, Best assessed visually on images obtained at right
contour abnormalities angles through vertically oriented airways
Lack of airway tapering >2 cm Mucoid impaction/fluid-filled airways
distal to point of bifurcation Tubular or Y-shaped structures; branching or rounded
opacities in cross section +/-air-fluid levels
Airway visibility within 1 cm of Bronchiolitis, clustered ill-defined centrilobular nodules
thecostal pleura of fissures with a tree-in-bud configuration
Mosaic attenuation caused by air trapping –Best identified
on expiratory HRCT images
Mosaic perfusion of the pulmonary identified on contrast-
enhanced dual energy CT of the pulmonary parenchyma
Bronchial artery hyperplasia
Pharmacological treatment (Table 10)
The treatment of bronchiectasis may be medical or surgical. Medical treatment aims to
relieve and control the symptoms, whereas surgical treatment is intended to eliminate the
disease itself. The main arms of medical treatment are control of lower respiratory tract
infection/inflammation with appropriate antibiotic treatment and the removal of bronchial
secretions by postural drainage
Table 10. Antibacterial agents for the treatment of bronchiectesis
Route Antibiotics Dose and duration
Oral Amoxicillin/clavulanic 625 mg BD for 10 days
acid
Quinolone (ciprofloxacin) 750 mg BD for 7 to 10 days
Azithromycin 500 mg OD for 7 to 10 days
Doxycycline 100 mg BD for 10 days
Intravenous Cefuroxime 750 mg TDS for 10 days
Ceftriaxone 2 g BD for 7 to 10 days
moxicillin/clavulanic acid 1.2 g TDS for 8 to 10 days
If Pseudomonas is Piperacillin/tazobactum 4.5 gTDS for 10 -14 days
causative organism isolated
Ceftazidime 2 g BD for 10 to 14 days
361

Respiratory Diseases
Meropenem + 1 g TDS for 10 to 14 days
Initially I/V followed by Aminoglycoside (dose as
oral ciprofloxacin 750 mg per weight)
for 10-14 days Gentamicin or amikacin
given once daily infusion
 Anti-inflammatory therapy
- Corticosteroids- Inhaled and oral
- NSAIDs- Inhaled and oral
Additional agents
- Long-actingβ agonists
- Long-acting anticholinergics
- Methylxanthines
- LT receptor antagonists
Non pharmacological treatment
 Surgical treatment plays only a small role in the present day management of
bronchiectasis
 Chest Physiotherapy
Physiotherapy techniques available for use in bronchiectasis
Independent techniques-Active cycle of breathing techniques, Autogenic drainage
Device-dependant techniques
- Positive expiratory pressure
- Oscillating positive expiratory pressure
- intrathoracic: Flutter, Acapella
- extrathoracic: high-frequency chest wall oscillations
- Intermittent positive pressure breathing
- Noninvasive ventilation
- Test of incremental respiratory endurance
Manual techniques
- chest percussion/clapping
- chest wall vibrations
- overpressure
- Gravity-assisted positioning
- Modified postural drainage
Complications
 Infective exacerbations occurring in patients with bronchiectasis are marked by both
increased volume and purulence of sputum. They may follow upper respiratory tract
infections in much the same way as exacerbations of chronic bronchitis.
362

Respiratory Diseases
 Haemoptysis occurs commonly in bronchiectasis. Such episodes are usually small,
although major (>200mL per 24h) or rarely massive (>1000mL per 24h) haemoptyses
may occur.
 Chronic paranasal sinusitis occurs in a high percentage of patients with bronchiectasis and
is very common in severe cases.
 Brain abscess, operative complications include haemorrhage, atelectasis, pneumonia,
empyema, bronchopleuralfistula and pneumothorax.
ROLE OF PHYSIOTHERAPY IN PULMONARY REHABILITIATION
 Pulmonary rehabilitation is a multidisciplinary service directed to a person with
pulmonary disease by an interdisciplinary team of specialist, with the goal of achieving
and maintaining the individual’s maximum level of independence and functioning in the
community.
 The main aim of pulmonary rehabilitation is to promote healthy attitudes and recognition
of the benefits of exercise in the management of a variety of conditions.
 Other aims of pulmonary rehabilitation are
Reduce dyspnoea, removal of secretion.
Improving thoracic mobility and increasing lung, increasing endurance and strength
-
of muscles (peripheral and respiratory)
-
Reduction of fatigue and energy conservation, ensure long term commitment to
exercise.
-
 Techniques to provide relaxation and promote breathing are
Diaphragmatic breathing = ask the patient to recruit diaphragm by placing the hand on
abdomen.
-
 Segmental breathing = keeping the hands on the segment which is to be treated and
asking the Patient to fill the air under the hands.
Pursed lip breathing = inhaling through nose and exhaling through pursed lips.
 Techniques to humidify the air mobilize the secretion and provide supplemental O
2.
-
Humidifier = It is used to humidify the inhaled air, it is very important when the upper
airway bypassed and Patients who has thick and tenacious secretions.
-
Nebulizer= Administration of Nebulizer containing Saline water, Bronchodilators or
Mucolytics are used to liquify the secretions and to dilate the narrowed or spasmodic
-
airways.
Oxygen therapy = It is administered when the patient‘s ventilator systemis
insufficient to provide required amount of oxygen to the body either during rest or
-
during exercise.
 Thetechniques to remove the secretions are,
363

Respiratory Diseases
ACBT (Active Cycle of Breathing Technique): It consists of repeated cycles of 3
ventilatory phases: breathing control, thoracic expansion and FET (Forced
-
Expiratory Techniques)
AD (Autogenic Drainage): It uses diaphragmatic breathing to mobilize secretions by
varying expiratory airflow.
-
Postural Drainage along with Percussion Vibration and Shaking: In PD Patient is
placed in positions that allow the bronchopulmonary trees to be drained with
-
assistance of gravity.
Manual Hyperinflation: It is used in patients on endotracheal tube or tracheostomy
two caregivers are needed one to use the bag to hyperinflate the lung during
-
inspiration and provide a quick release to allow rapid exhalation. And second to apply
shaking or vibrations at beginning of expiration.
Positive Expiratory Pressure (PEP): It consists of a mouthpiece to which one way
valve is connected which is attached with expiratory resister which provides pressure
-
during expiration which helps in avoiding the collapsing airway and remove the
secretions.
High Frequency Chest Compression (HFCC): It is used to give oscillations and
compressions to whole lungs in sitting position helps in mucus clearance.
-
In diseases like Pleural Effusion the fluid gets accumulated in the pleural cavity so for
that positioning in such a way that gravity assists the drainage of fluid faster through
-
ICD occurs like side lying with sound side up and deep inspiration followed with
maximum expiration eg. ballooning, bubble making etc.
364