Chapter 18
PEDIATRIC CONDITIONS
NEWBORN CARE
Salient features
 Essential newborn care (ENC) is a comprehensive strategy designed to improve the
health of newborns through interventions before conception, during pregnancy, at and
soon after birth, and in the postnatal period.
 ENC comprises of:
- Basic preventive newborn care such as care before and during pregnancy, clean
delivery practices, eye and cord care, prevention of hypothermia and infection
- Early and exclusive breastfeeding on demand day and night.
- Early detection of problems or danger signs (with priority for sepsis and birth
asphyxia) and appropriate referral and care seeking.
Treatment
Establishment of breathing at birth
 Most newborns cry immediately at birth and therefore need no assistance to establish
breathing. If the baby is preterm, meconium stained or some evidence of infection, not
crying or breathing or with poor muscle tone, then proceed to initial steps of resuscitation.
 For term babies, use 100% oxygen when baby is cyanotic or when positive pressure
ventilation is required. If room air is being used, supplementary oxygen should be
available to use if there is no appreciable improvement within 90 seconds of birth. If
supplemental oxygen is not available, positive pressure ventilation should be continued
with room air.
 Infants without signs of life (no heart beat and no respiratory effort) after 10 minutes of
resuscitation show either a high mortality or severe neurodevelopmental disability. After
10 minutes of continuous and adequate resuscitative efforts, discontinuation of
resuscitation may be justified if there are no signs of life.
Hypothermia
 Identification of hypothermia. An axillary (or rectal) temperature <36.0°C is
hypothermia. Such a baby would feel cold to touch on the abdomen and periphery.
 Identification of cold stress: Baby's peripheries are cold but abdomen is warm. This
usually corresponds to axillary temperature of 36-36.4°C.
 Prevention of hypothermia.
- Dry the baby with warm dry linen at birth. Discard wet linen and wrap in dry linen.
Place baby after birth under a radiant warmer or 200 Watt bulb (placed at a distance of 45 cm
above the baby). If neither is available, place the newborn infant on the mother's chest
365

Pediatric Conditions
and wrap baby and mother together to prevent heat loss from the exposed skin surfaces of
the baby.
- Ensure that there are no open windows or fans turning in the delivery
area where baby is being delivered or being observed.
- Suction mouth and then nose with mucous sucker
- Delay bathing of newborn for the first few days; this will prevent hypothermia. However,
baby may be wiped with warm clean water to remove dried blood, vernix or secretions.
Care must be taken to ensure that the room is warm and draught free when the baby is
being cleaned or bathed. The baby should immediately be wrapped in dry linen after
being wiped dry.
 After birth and for the first few days thereafter keep mother and baby in close proximity
with baby being adequately clothed. In cold weather, the baby must have 2 layers of
cotton vest with a woolen sweater, cap, socks and legs should be covered and baby should
be wrapped in a blanket. In summer, cotton dress with a cotton diaper wrapped in a
cotton cloth.
Prevention of infection
 Always clean hands with soap and water and wear sterile gloves if available before
conducting the birth of the baby and while examining babies during the first few days of
life.
 A sterilized blade (if that is not available a new razor blade or a blade boiled for at least
20 minutes) must be used for cutting the cord at delivery. The cord tie used must be
sterile or boiled for 20 minutes before used for tying the cord after birth.
 The surface for conducting delivery and placing the baby after birth must be clean.
 Do not apply anything to the cord or eyes after birth.
 Do not give prelacteal feeds. Give exclusive breast-feeding from birth.
Exclusive breastfeeding
 Advise mothers to start breast feeding within one hour of birth. Not to give any prelacteal
feeds such as honey, water, etc.
 Give breast feeds to baby on demand. Give the baby exclusive breast feeding for at least
first 6 months of life. However, there may be situations where it may not be possible to
provide human milk i.e., maternal death, severe maternal illness, HIV positive mothers
and documented lactational inadequacy.
 Not to give water to the baby during period of exclusive breast feeding.
Early identification of high-risk newborns
 Babies born to mothers with eclampsia, antepartum haemorrhage, diabetes etc. are
considered as high-risk newborns and delivery should be conducted at a centre where all
facilities for the care of the newborn are available. The following examination at birth or
during the first few days would help detect high risk babies who are in need of immediate
referral to an appropriate health facility which has adequate newborn care.
366

Pediatric Conditions
 Weigh baby. Babies with birth weights <2000 g are at increased risk of morbidity and
mortality and need careful assessment by a physician trained in child health.
 Examine for major malformations. Most major and life threatening malformations such
as neural tube defects, oesophageal and anal atresias, diaphragmatic hernia, etc. can be
detected at birth by careful examination. Some important clues to an underlying
malformation are non-passage of meconium at 24 h of age or non-passage of urine at 48 h
after birth.
 Sucking, activity and cry. Newborn infants who have poor sucking, are less active than
normal and have a weak cry are very ill and need immediate referral.
 Respiratory distress. Babies who have a respiratory rate of >60 bpm (counted for at least
1 minute and persisting on repeat count) or have severe subcostal retractions have
respiratory distress and need immediate referral.
 Identification of severe jaundice. Yellow staining of the skin within 24 h of age or when
yellow staining of the skin includes the palms and soles at any age, this is severe jaundice
and needs immediate referral.
Immunization
All newborns delivered at a health facility should be given BCG and one dose of oral
polio vaccine within 24 hours of birth.
LOW BIRTH WEIGHT BABIES
Salient features
 Low birth weight (LBW) baby is one who weighs less than 2500 g at birth. Low birth
weight may result from either prematurity (gestational age <37 weeks) or intrauterine
growth retardation (IUGR), which is also called small-for-date baby.
Treatment
Indications for hospitalization are:
 Birth weight of less than 1800 g, gestation age of less than 34 weeks , neonate who is not
able to take feeds from the breast or by cup (katori) and spoon (irrespective of birth
weight and gestation), sick neonate (irrespective of birth weight and gestation).
Keep the LBW babies warm
Room temperature should be kept between 28-30°C. Following methods may be used:
 Maternal-baby skin to skin contact (Kangaroo mother care). Place the naked baby
between the mother's breasts. Wrap baby and mother with a shawl. Cover the baby's head
with a cap.
 Proper clothing - cap, woollen sweaters, socks and mittens. Blankets, Overhead radiant
warmer, Incubator
 Nutrition-guidelines to provide fluids and nutrients to low birth weight babies are given in
following table.
367

Pediatric Conditions
Table 1. Guidelines to provide fluids and nutrients to low birth weight babies (LWB)
Age Category of neonates
Birth weight <1200 g 1200-1800 g >1800 g
gestation <30 weeks 30-34 weeks >34 weeks
Initial Intravenous fluids Gavage Breast feeding. Ifnot
(60 ml/kg/day)with feed (60 ml/kg/day) satisfactory, spoon feeds
After 1-3 days Gavage (15-30 ml/kg/d), Katori/spoon Breast feeding
increase by 15-30 ml/kg/day maximum of
to a maximum of 180 150-180 ml/kg/d
ml/kg/day of expressed
breast milk
Later Katori/spoon (150-180 Breast feeding Breast feeding
(2-4 weeks) ml/kg/day)
Vitamin supplementation
 Vitamin K 1.0 mg IM at birth
 Vitamin A 1000 IU orally daily- from 1 week age onwards
 Vitamin D 400 IU orally daily- from 2 week age onwards
 Iron 2-4 mg/kg/day orally daily- from 4 weeks age onwards
 Vitamin E, calcium and phosphorus supplementation in very LBW (<1500 g, <32 week
gestation).
Early detection of sickness by periodic evaluation
Referral to higher centre in the presence of any one or more ofthe following signs: Lethargy,
refusal to feed, hypothermia, respiratory distress, grunt, apnoea, abnormal weight gain,
jaundice over soles and palms, abdominal distension, feed intolerance, cyanosis, pallor,
seizures and bleeding.
NEONATAL JAUNDICE
Salient features
 Characterized by yellow eyes, mucus membrane or skin. Common during the first
week of life. About 60% of newborn develop transient, self-limiting jaundice -
Physiological jaundice. About 5% of newborn develop pathological jaundice.
 Progression of jaundice is cephalopedal. Yellow colouration of trunk indicates the
serum bilirubin to range between 10 and 12 mg/dl whereas staining of palms and
soles is ominous as it indicates a serum bilirubin of more than 15 mg/dl.
 Physiological jaundice is characterized by its characteristic timeline – appears within
3rd day and resolves within 14 days of birth. Pathological jaundice may cause
kernicterus when unconjugated bilirubin exceeds 20 mg/dl. If persists > 2 weeks, the
baby should be investigated for cholestatic jaundice.
368

Pediatric Conditions
Treatment
All neonates need assessment for jaundice. But not all jaundiced neonates require treatment.
 Phototherapy:
- Mainstay of treatment and usually initiated when total serum bilirubin level reached
phototherapy threshold (10 to 12 mg/dl for preterm and 15 mg/dl for term babies).
- The naked infant (with covered eyes) is kept about 45 cm below the phototherapy unit.
Phototherapy is administered continuously and interrupted only for nursing and feeding
purpose with change in position every 2-4 hours.
- Failure of phototherapy is defined as inability to observe a decline in bilirubin of 1-2
mg/dl after 4-6 hour and/or to keep the bilirubin level below the exchange transfusion
level.
 Exchange transfusion:
- It is indicated when bilirubin level exceeds threshold levels for age and gestational age or
have features of bilirubin encephalopathy.
- Choice of blood: Group and type specific, compatible packed RBCs with anticoagulant,
<7 days old.
- Complications include hypothermia, fluid overload, infection, electrolyte imbalance,
hypoglycaemia, thrombosis and death.
- Monitoring of heart rate, saturation, respiration, temperature, glucose and bilirubin levels
is required.
 Adjunct treatment:
- Intravenous immunoglobulin
- Phenobarbitone
Follow up
 Neurodevelopmental assessment at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months of age.
 Hearing assessment (BERA) at 3 month of age.
 Prognosis is excellent in uncomplicated cases.
 Prognosis is guarded if jaundice is severe and requiring exchange transfusion.
MANAGEMENT OF COMMON CLINICAL PROBLEMS IN NEWBORNS
 Regurgitation of feeds and vomiting: Non-projectile expulsion of stomach contents
without force (regurgitation) is normal and needs advice regarding feeding technique.
 Bowel disorders: No medication should be prescribed for passage of stools after each feed
(exaggerated gastrocolic reflex) as this is normal in some babies. From 3rd to 14th day
many exclusively breast-fed babies pass loose stools (10-15 times/ day) without
illness/dehydration. These are transitional stools and require no medication.
 Delayed passage of urine: Non-passage of urine by 48 hours after birth may suggest
urinary tract anomalies. Such babies need to be investigated. Crying before passing urine
is normal.
369

Pediatric Conditions
 Dehydration fever: Transitory moderate fever (up to 38.5°C) usually during the second or
third day of life in summer months in an active baby, who sucks well, is normal and
responds to lowering the environmental temperature.
 Excessive crying: Most baby cry when either they are hungry or are having discomfort
such as due to full bladder before passing urine, wet napkin, nose block etc. Excessive
inconsolable crying or high-pitched crying is indicative of meningitis or any other painful
inflammatory conditions.
 Umbilical sepsis: If there is pus discharge not extending to periumbilical skin, apply 10%
gentian violet or povidone iodine locally twice a day. However, if there is periumbilical
erythema or induration, administer syrup erythromycin 40 mg/kg/day in 3-4 divided
doses. If the newborn has any other high risk factor, refer to a higher centre.
 Umbilical granuloma: A red flesh-like nodule at the base of umbilical cord can be
managed by cautery with silver nitrate or application of common salt for 3 to 4 days.
 Engorgement of breasts in both sexes and vaginal bleeding after 4 days of birth is normal.
IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE
 A number of vaccines available for childhood immunization to protect against are
important national causes of childhood morbidity and mortality.
 Both killed and live vaccines can be administered simultaneously without decreasing the
efficacy of the individual vaccine. However, vaccines be administered at different sites
using separate needles for each component. A gap of 1 month is recommended between 2
live vaccines if not given together.
 Avoid giving injections if skin is infected or compromised by a skin lesion. Prepare skin
with a disinfectant. Always use a sterile syringe and needle for each injection and to
reconstitute each unit of medication. After use syringes and needles should be disposed
off carefully as per guidelines together.
Table 2. National immunization schedule (Universal Immunization Programme)
Vaccine Age recommended
BCG Birth or 6 weeks.
OPV Birth, 6, 10, 14 weeks, 15-18 months.
Hepatitis B Birth, 6, 10, 14 weeks
DPT 6, 10, 14 weeks, 15-18 months.
Measles 9 months.
MMR 15-18 months.
DT 5 years.
TT 10 and 16 years (if given for first time at this age,
give 2 doses at 4 weeks Interval).
370

Pediatric Conditions
Table 3. Immunization recommended by the Indian Academy of Pediatrics
Vaccine Age recommended
BOG From birth to 2 weeks
OPV At birth; 6,10 and 14 weeks
DTP 6,10 and 14 weeks; 15-18 months; 5 years (DT)
Hepatitis B Birth, 6 and 14 weeks or Birth, 1 and 6 months or 6,
10 and 14 weeks
Hib 6,10 and 14 weeks; 15-18 months
Measles 9 months + (special circumstances (epidemics) may
be given earlier
than 9 months)
MMR 15-18 months
Typhoid 2 years + (revaccination 3-4 years)
TT 10 and 16 years
2 doses of TT Pregnant women at I month interval
Newer Vaccines
Varicella Above 1 year
Hepatitis A Above 1 year
 If the mother is known to be HBsAg negative, HB vaccine can be given along with DTP at 6, 10
and 14 weeks. If the mother's status HBsAg status is not known, it is advisable to start vaccination
soon after birth to prevent perinatal transmission of the disease. If the mother is HBsAg positive
(and especially HBsAg positive), the baby should be given Hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG)
within 24 hours of birth, along with HB vaccine.
 The only advantage of combination vaccines is convenience, however, should not be viewed as
more effective than vaccines given separately. The manufacturer's instructions should be strictly
followed whenever "mixing" vaccines in the same syringe prior to injections.
Immunization in special circumstances
 Immunization in preterm infants: In general, all vaccines may be administered as per
schedule according to the chronological age irrespective of birth weight or period of
gestation. Very low birth weight/ preterm babies can be given immunization if they are
stable otherwise.
 Children receiving corticosteroids: Children receiving oral corticosteroids in high doses
(prednisolone 1-2 mg/kg/day) for more than 14 days should not receive live virus
vaccines until the steroid has been discontinued for at least one month. Killed vaccines
are safe but may not be completely effective in such situations. Patients on topical or
inhaled steroids should not be denied their age appropriate vaccine.
 Children awaiting splenectomy: Immunization with pneumococcal, Hib and
meningococcal vaccine should be initiated a few weeks prior to splenectomy.
 Vaccination in children with HIV infection: Immune response may be suboptimal as it
depends on the degree of immunodeficiency at that point of time. Readministration of
371

Pediatric Conditions
childhood immunization may be considered when their immune status has improved
following anti-retroviral therapy.
 Lapsed immunization: There is no need to restart a vaccine series regardless of the time
that has elapsed between individuals dose. In case of unknown or uncertain immunization
status, however, it is appropriate to start the schedule as for an unimmunized child.
 Minor illnesses like fever, diarrhoea, respiratory infections and malnutrition should not be
construed as contraindications to immunization.
FLUID AND ELECTROLYTES THERAPY IN CHILDREN
Fluid and electrolyte therapy is divided into three phases: Correction of pre-existing deficits
like rehydration therapy for diarrhea. Provision of maintenance requirements for normal
metabolism, correction of ongoing losses (diarrhea, vomiting) or removal (suction,
aspiration). The maintenance requirements are as follows:
A guideline for estimating daily fluid and electrolyte requirement in a normal child under
normal conditions is:
Weight Fluid requirement
3-10 kg 100 ml/kg/day
10-20 kg 1000 ml + 50 ml/kg/day for each kg above 10.
> 20 kg 1500 ml + 20 ml/kg/day for each kg above 20.
Maintenance fluid requirement replaces water loss through skin (2/3 of losses), GIT,
respiration, and urine. These losses are affected by ambient humidity, clothing, body
temperature, respiratory rate, and age of the child. Situation specific adjustments are
necessary when calculating maintenance fluids. The most commonly employed intravenous
maintenance fluid employed in children is N/5 (0.18%) sodium chloride in 5% glucose +
potassium chloride 20 mEq/ Liter. Commercially it is available as Isolyte P, Kidral etc.
Maintenance requirements in newborns
The following table provides the normal fluid electrolyte requirements in newborn babies.
Table 4. Normal fluid requirements of newborns
Age (days) Total fluids Glucose/Dextrose (ml/kg/day) Electrolyte
1 60 10% Dextrose in water None
2 70-80 -do- None
3 80-90 -do- Sodium 2-3 mmol/kg/day
Potassium 2 mmol/kg/day
4 90-100 -do- -do-
5 100-110 -do- -do-
6 110-120 -do- -do-
372

Pediatric Conditions
 From day 3 onwards, fluid containing glucose-electrolyte mixture can be provided using
commercially available paediatric maintenance intravenous solutions provided 5% weight
loss has been documented.
 The fluid and electrolyte requirement from day 7-28 remains the same. However, in
babies <1500 g the fluid requirement after day 7 need to be increased by 10-20 ml/kg/day
till a maximum of 150 ml/kg/day.
Conditions that increase fluid requirement
 Fever: for every 1°C increases over 37.5°C, the fluid requirement increases by 10
ml/kg/day.
 Phototherapy: this increases fluid requirement by 10-20 ml/kg/day.
Conditions that decrease fluid requirement
 Congestive cardiac failure: Fluid requirements are reduced to 2/3rd of the normal need for
that age.
 Renal failure: In cases of decreased urinary output, the fluid regimen is 400 ml/m2/day for
insensible water losses plus urinary output over the day. Potassium should be added with
caution or omitted in suspected cases of acute renal failure.
IRON DEFICIENCY ANAEMIA
Salient features
 Iron deficiency anaemia occurs mainly due to dietary lack of iron containing food.
 RBC indices like reticulocyte count, serum iron concentration, total iron binding
capacity(TIBC) etc aids in diagnosis of iron deficiency anaemia.
 Clinical features are easy tiredness, lack of concentration, decreased school
performance, growth retardation. Severe cases may present with CCF.
 Iron deficiency is uncommon in term breastfed children but prematurity, perinatal
blood loss or cow milk feeding may lead to deficiency in infancy.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 After period of exclusive breastfeeding (6 months), cereal based diet should be added.
Encourage green leafy vegetables and fruits.
 Treatment depends on hemoglobin levels and age of the patients
Pharmacological treatment-Oral Iron Therapy
 Oral ferrous salts (sulphate, gluconate etc) are the preferred therapeutic iron preparations.
 Therapeutic iron dose: 4 mg/kg/day of elemental iron in 2 – 3 divided doses to be given
between meals for 2 months after normal Hb concentration for age is achieved.
 In prematurity start iron syrup from 2nd week of life to 1 year.
 Response to therapy – decreased irritability and improved appetite is seen within 12 – 24
hours. Rise in Hb levels seen within 7 days at the rate of 0.25 –0.4 g/dl/day.
373

Pediatric Conditions
 If the response is inadequate, check for the prescribed dose, compliance, presence of
diarrhoea or malnutrition, infections or β thalas semia trait mistakenly diagnosed as iron
deficiency anaemia.
Parenteral Iron Therapy
 It is rarely required. However, when oral iron is not tolerated, severe ADRs to oral iron or
presence of malabsorption syndromes, parenteral iron therapy may be used.
 Total dose of iron is: Iron(mg) = wt(kg) x Hb deficit (g/dl) x 4
 Injection iron dextran or iron sorbitol citrate (50 mg/ml) deep gluteal IM injection is
preferred.
Blood Transfusion
 When Hb is less than 3g% or Hb 4-6 g% in cardiac compromised patient
 PCV 15 ml/kg at rate of 4-5 ml/kg/hour
Patient/ parent education
 Iron deficiency anaemia occurs generally due to dietary deficiency of iron. Once the diet is
modified, the patient should stick to that diet.
 Iron should be taken between meals and never with tea or milk
 Intake of iron usually causes harmless black discolouration of teeth and stools. The teeth
discolouration can be prevented by rinsing the mouth with water after doses.
MEGALOBLASTIC ANEMIA
Salient features
 Folic acid and vitamin B are two most essential micronutrients. Deficiency of both
12
occurs due to dietary lack. B deficiency is especially seen in strict vegetarians as its
12
main dietary source is non vegetarian food.
 Detailed diet history, Hb concentration, reticulocyte count, RBC indices help
establishing diagnosis of megaloblastic anemia.
 Clinical features are same as iron deficiency anemia. Young child may show tremors
and typical pigmentation over knuckles.
Pharmacological treatment
 Folic acid Deficiency- Oral folic acid - <6 months of age: 15 mcg/kg for 3 months
7 months –13 year: 1 mg for 3 weeks followed by 0.1-0.5 mg for next 3 months
 Vitamin B Deficiency
12
- Oral/sublingual vitamin B12
500-1000 mcg/day for 4-6 weeks
25-50 mcg/day for next 3 months
- Parenteral vitamin B12
100 mcg IM for 2 weeks
100-250 mcg/day IM till complete correction
374

Pediatric Conditions
PROTEIN ENERGY MALNUTRITION
Nutritional marasmus and kwashiorkor are two extreme forms of malnutrition. Such extreme
forms are rare; most cases suffer from mild and moderate nutritional deficit.
Salient features
 Milder forms may just present with failure to thrive i.e. decreased rate of weight gain.
 Marasmus is characterized by gross wasting of muscle and subcutaneous tissues
resulting in emaciation, marked stunting, and no oedema.
 Markedly retarded growth, psychomotor changes, and oedema of dependent parts are
three essential clinical features of kwashiorkor.
- PEM is usually associated with anaemia due to iron, protein, vitamin B or folic acid
12
deficiency, xerophthalmia due to vitamin A deficiency, and other micronutrient
deficiencies magnesium, copper, zinc, vitamins B, C, D and K.
Assessment of nutritional status
Undernutrition is classified by WHO into moderate and severe forms as shown in the
following table. Reference values for weight for height are also provided.
Table5. WHO classification for severity of undernutrition
Moderate undernutrition Severe undernutrition
Symmetrical edema No Yesa
Weight for height SD scoreb -2 to -3 SD score < -3
(measure of wasting) (70–79% of expectedc) (<70% of expected)
Height forage SD scoreb -2 to -3 SD score < -3
(measure of stunting) (85–89% of expectedc) (<85% of expected)
a. This includes kwashiorkor and marasmic kwashiorkor
b. SD score = Observed value–expected value
Standard deviation of reference population
c. Median (50th percentile of NCHS standards).
Table 6. NCHS/WHO Normalized reference values for weight-for-height/length
Boys' weight (kg) Girls' weight (kg)
Length(cm)
-3 SD -2 SD Median Median -2 SD -3 SD
2.2 2.5 3.3 50 3.4 2.6 2.3
2.7 3.3 4.3 55 4.3 3.3 2.8
3.7 4.4 5.7 60 5.5 4.3 3.7
5.0 5.7 7.1 65 7.0 5.5 4.8
6.3 7.0 8.5 70 8.4 6.8 6.0
7.4 8.2 9.8 75 9.6 7.9 7.0
8.3 9.2 10.9 80 10.6 8.8 8.0
375

Pediatric Conditions
8.9 9.9 12.1 85 11.8 9.7 8.6
9.8 10.9 13.3 90 12.9 10.7 9.5
10.7 11.9 14.5 95 14.1 11.6 10.4
11.6 13.0 15.7 100 15.4 12.7 11.3
12.7 14.2 17.1 105 16.7 13.8 12.3
13.8 15.4 18.7 110 18.2 15.0 13.4
SD-standard deviation score (or z score).
Indian Academy of Paediatrics (IAP) takes a weight of more than 80% of expected for age as
normal. Grades of malnutrition are: Grade I (71-80%), Grade II (61-70%), Grade III (51-
60%) and Grade IV (< 50%) weight of expected value for that age.
Treatment
Mild to moderate undernutrition
 Domiciliary treatment of malnourished children is economical, offers in-built advantage of
practical health education, and is associated with minimal recurrence risk.
 The parents are advised to increase the food intake of the child, adequate amount of calories
and protein in the diet, prepared from the locally available, inexpensive foods.
 Keep the child under surveillance by using a growth chart and effort should be made that he
does not slip down to severe malnutrition.
Severe malnutrition
 Initial treatment involves managing complications. The aim is to treat complications and
stabilize the child.
 Severely wasted children and those with oedema need hospitalization. Other indications for
admission in an undernourished child are severe dehydration, severe diarrhoea, hypothermia,
shock, systemic infection, jaundice, bleeding, age less than one year, or persistent loss of
appetite.
 Those with severe stunting alone may be managed in the community.
 Refer, when child fails to (i) regain appetite by day 4, (ii) loose oedema by day 5, or (iii) gain
weight by day 10 of therapy.
 Children who fail to respond to treatment should be screened for faulty feeding, inadequate
feeding, persistent diarrhoea, malabsorption, giardiasis, shigellosis, amoebiasis, otitis media,
pneumonia, UTI, fungal infections, scabies, tuberculosis, helminthiasis, malaria, and
HIV/AIDS. If the search proves futile, one should also look for any underlying
immunological disease, inborn errors of metabolism and malignancies. Hospital management
of severe malnutrition is given in the following table.
Table 7. Hospital management of severe malnutrition
Problem Management
Hypothermia (rectal Keep under heat source such as radiant warmer, room heater, hot air
temperature <35.5ºC) blower or 200 watt bulb and warm upto rectal temperature 37ºC
376

Pediatric Conditions
within 2 –3 hours
 If electric gadgets are not available, cover the child well. Warm up
with kangaroo technique (placing the naked child against mothers
bare chest and covering them both together with cloth and blanket)
 Monitor rectal temperature half hourly. Investigate and treat for
infection and hypoglycemia.
Hypoglycemia (blood 10% glucose 5 – 10 ml/kg IV immediately followed by IV infusion
sugar <54 mg/dl) of a dextrose containing solution.
 Stop IV fluids as soon as blood glucose stabilizes and switch to oral
feeds.
Dehydration (as  Some dehydration is to be corrected with 2/3rd diluted ORS over 12
assessed by WHO hours.
classification)  Severe dehydration: Administer Ringer’s Lactate or N/2 5% saline
30 ml/kg 2 hours. If still pulse is not palpable, consider septic shock
and manage accordingly.
Severe dehydration  If pulse improves after 2 hours, give N/6 5% saline at 10 ml/kg/hour
(weak pulse, oliguria) in next 10 hours followed by 5 ml/kg/hr in next 12 hours.
 After dehydration is corrected, start on maintenance fluids at 75-100
mg/kg/day till feeding is established.
 Add potassium to IV fluids at 30 mEq/l after the child passes urine.
Septic shock (clinical Give blood or plasma transfusion at 10 ml/kg over 3 hours.
features similar to  Start antibiotics as given in Infections
severe dehydration)  Fluid management is similar to that of severe dehydration
Dyselectrolytemia  There is a risk of hypernatremia and hypokalemia.
 Restrict sodium intake and do not give hypertonic saline even in face
of hyponatremia.
 Potassium supplements should be given at 30 – 40 mEq/L per day of
fluids provided the child is passing urine freely.
Infections  No apparent signs of infection and no complications, then give
cotrimoxazole (5 mg/kg of trimethoprim) twice daily for 5 days.
 Presence of septic shock, hypoglycemia, hypothermia, skin,
respiratory, urinary infections or sick looking, give injection
ampicillin 50 – 100 mg/kg IM or IV 6 hrly + gentamicin 7.5 mg/kg
IM or IV once a day for 7 days
 If no response to above antibiotics in 48 hours, add chloramphenicol
25 mg/kg IM or IV 8 hourly. Give every 6 hourly if meningitis is
suspected.
 If specific infections are detected such as dysentery, malaria,
pneumonia, worm infestation, tuberculosis, treat as per STG of that
377

Pediatric Conditions
particular condition.
Congestive cardiac  Restrict fluid intake.
failure (tachycardia,  Give injection furosemide 1 mg/kg stat.
cardiomegaly)
Severe anaemia  If JVP is elevated, give a single dose of Inj. digoxin 5 mcg/kg
(hemoglobin <4 gm  Give packed red cells 10 ml/kg in 4 – 6 hours, carefully monitoring
%) cardiac status.
Vitamin A deficiency Give a single dose of vitamin A orally to all children less than 6
months – 50,000 IU, 6 months to 1 year – 1,00,000 IU, more than 1
year–2,00,000 IU if the dose has not been given in the last month.
 If signs of vitamin A deficiency are present, repeat the above dose
twice–the next day and then after 2 weeks.
Vitamin K deficiency Injection vitamin K 2.5 mg IM single dose.
or severe bleeding
Magnesium  Give 02 ml/kg of 50% solution of magnesium sulphate IV single
deficiency dose.
Folic acid deficiency Give folic acid 5 mg on day 1 followed by 1 mg/day.
Initiation of cure
First seven days aim: start nutrition
Starting point
Once complications are taken care of and child is ready to tolerate feeds.
Table 8. Initiation of cure
Start feeding  Initiate feed as early as possible.
 If oral feeding is not possible, give nasogastric feeding.
 Start with a lower volume of feed at frequent intervals, number
of feeds varying from 12 feeds on first and second day to 6 to 8
feeds on days 3 –7.
 If tolerated, milk based diets are most suitable (80 kcal/kg/day)
and protein (0.7 gm/kg/day). The caloric intake should not
exceed 100 kcal/kg/day on the first day. Increased gradually over
one week to 150 kcal/kg/day of energy and 2 – 3 gm/kg/day of
proteins. Total amount of fluids should be kept within 100 – 125
ml/kg/day.
 Sugar and oil can be added to provide extra calories.
Lactose intolerance  Reduce the total lactose load in the diet by diluting the milk for 3
(stool pH, 5.5 on two to 4 days or substituting a part of milk feeds by formulae based
separate on lactose free milk protein (calcium caesinate), sugar and oil,
occasions) soyabean, meat or vegetable protein mixtures.
Other nutrients  Supplement the diet with minerals and trace elements as follows:
378

Pediatric Conditions
potassium chloride (1.2 to 2.4 g/L of feed), magnesium chloride
(300 – 600 mg/L of feed), zinc acetate (20 mg per day), copper
acetate (2 mg/L of feed), selenium (6 – 10 mcg/kg/day) and folic
acid (1 mg/day). Do not give iron at this stage. Add iron only
after one week of therapy.
 Vitamins of B complex are not useful in initial therapy.
Signs of  During these seven days, a child of kwashiorkar will lose weight
improvement and a marasmic child gains little or nothing because the tissue
gains are masked by excess water loss.
Rehabilitative phase  Aim: Restore normal weight for height.
(2–6 weeks)  Starting point: Child has started showing signs of recovery of
appetite and changes in expression.
Intensive feeding  Replace the initial milk diet with home diet as soon as possible.
(too recover lost  Provide therapeutic diet as follows: fluids 150 ml/kg/day, energy
weight) 175–200 kcal/kg/day, proteins 2 –4gm/kg/day.
 The diet prescribed for the child should be such which the family
can afford for the baby within its limited income, can be cooked
easily at home, does not perish easily, is culturally acceptable,
and easily available in the local market.
Treat concurrent  Start oral iron 3 mg/kg/day elemental iron once a day. Start other
nutritional vitamins including B, C, D, E at double the RDA.
deficiencies  Continue potassium, magnesium, zinc, copper, selenium and
folic acid supplementation.
 Provide vitamin D 400 IU once daily for 4 weeks/.
NUTRITIONAL RICKETS
Salient features
 It is defective mineralization of growing skeleton caused by deficiency of vitamin D
characterized by skeletal deformities like genu valgum/genu varum, broadening of
wrists, susceptibility to fractures, weakness, hypotonia and disturbances in growth.
Most often it is nutritional (lack of exposure to sunlight and inadequate dietary intake)
and occurs between 2 months to 2 years of age.
 X ray shows that increased thickness of epiphyseal growth plate, cupped with hazy
metaphyseal borders. S. calcium is generally normal/ low, phosphate is low/ normal and
alkaline phosphatase is raised in nutritional rickets.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Encourage the child to play outdoors/ increase exposure to sunlight.
 Enhance dietary sources of vitamin D -dairy products, egg and fish liver oil.
Pharmacological treatment
379

Pediatric Conditions
 Vitamin D 600,000 IU stat oral or IM (if patient is sick due to intercurrent infection).
 Repeat X-ray wrist after 4 weeks. If the response is positive, i.e. healing line of rickets is
seen on X-ray, continue oral vitamin D 400 IU/ day.
 If no response to therapy after 4 weeks refer to a higher centre for evaluation of non-
nutritional rickets.
Patient education
 Exposure to sunlight is beneficial for a child with rickets.
 No special type of oil is required for massage.
 Consumption of dairy products which are rich in vitamin D should be emphasized.
 Most of the deformities improve in the due course of time.
PICA
Salient features
 Repeated and chronic ingestion of non-nutrient substances including mud, plaster, paint,
earth, clay, etc. It is self-limiting and represents manifestations of family disorganization,
poor supervision, and emotional neglect.
Treatment
Pica below two years does not need any intervention.
Children with pica are at increased risk of lead poisoning, iron deficiency, bezoars, and
parasitic infections. They should be investigated for these problems and if present, treated
suitably.
PRIMARY NOCTURNAL ENURESIS
Most common cause in primary enuresis is inappropriate toilet training. Other causes could
be genetic, sleep disorder, reduced ADH at night. Psychological causes may be found in
secondary. Around 3% children have organic pathology, such as obstructive uropathy or UTI.
Salient features
 Involuntary discharge of urine after the age at which bladder control should have been
established (5 years). In primary nocturnal enuresis, child has never been dry at night
while in secondary, child has been continent for at least 6 months before the child begins
to wet again.
Non-pharmacological treatment (effective in 30% cases)
 Rule out organic causes. Restrict fluid intake in the evening. Bladder exercises:
- hold urine as long as possible during the day.
- practice repeated starting and stopping the stream at the toilet bowl.
 Practice getting up from bed and going to the bathroom at bedtime before sleep.
380

Pediatric Conditions
Pharmacological treatment
 Indicated only in children > 6 years where sufficient trial of non-pharmacological
management has failed.
 Tab. imipramine: 6-8 year (25 mg), 9-12 year (50 mg), >12 year (75 mg) once a day at
bedtime. Or desmopressin acetate (nasal spray, 10 mcg per spray): Start with 10 mcg
given at bedtime daily and increase gradually by 10 mcg/per week to a maximum of 40
mcg per day. If effective, it should be used or 3-6 months.
 Refer the patient to a higher centre if organic cause is suspected or when diagnosis is in
doubt.
Patient education
 Reassure the parents that condition is self-limiting.
 Ask the parents to maintain a diary record of dry nights; reward the child for such nights.
WHEEZY CHILD
 Wheezing is a clinical symptom present in asthma and other illnesses including
bronchiolitis and other viral infection, foreign body inhalation, tuberculosis, pneumonia,
cystic fibrosis, hypersensitivity pneumonia and conditions compressing airways.
Wheezing during infancy could be due to viral infections.
 Wheezing in asthma is recurrent, gets worse in night and after exercise, seasonal and may
be associated with other allergic illnesses like atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis etc.
 Clinical features suggestive of other cause of wheezing are: neonatal onset, associated
with difficulty in feeding, choking or vomiting, localized findings in chest or abnormality
in cardiovascular system.
ACUTE BRONCHIOLITIS
Salient features
 It is an acute respiratory tract infection caused by respiratory syncytial virus.
Bronchiolitis commonly occurs in infants below 6 months of age during during winter
and early spring. Symptoms-running nose for 2-4 days followed by cough, wheeze and
rapid respiration. With increasing severity of illness there may be lower chest indrawing,
difficulty in feeding, excessive crying due to hypoxaemia, cyanosis and respiratory
failure. History of viral URTI in other family members in the recent past.
 Normal or minimal increase in total leucocyte counts with relative lymphocytosis. X-ray
chest may show hyperinflation and small atelectasis. Clinical judgement remains the
gold standard criteria for hospital admission. SpO2 monitoring is the most consistent
clinical predictor of worsening.
381

Pediatric Conditions
Non-pharmacological treatment
For associated nasal block normal saline drops in both nostrils as and when required,
especially before feeds, and use of home remedies (ginger, honey, tulsi) for control of cough
and plenty of liquids orally. To be nursed in comfortable environment.
Pharmacological treatment
 Adequate hydration and oxygenation (humidified O2) remain the backbone of treatment.
 Treatment of mild disease (ambulatory treatment at home) - No antibiotics, Syr. paracetamol
10-15 mg/kg 4-6 hourly for fever.
 If patient shows overall improvement with no evidence of chest indrawing, cyanosis,
difficulty in feeding continue treatment as above. If there is partial improvement patient
should be called again after 2 days or earlier if patient deteriorates for reassessment.
 Hospitalize immediately if any of the following develop: chest indrawing, poor feeding,
cyanosis, altered sensorium and convulsions and managed as severe disease.
 If there is no improvement or deterioration at any time during the illness, the patient should
be managed as severe disease.
 Treatment of the severe disease (needs hospitalization for management) - oxygen
administration by oxygen hood or nasal catheter and intravenous fluids if child is not able to
feed.
 Adrenaline inhalation (injectable form) 0.3 mg/kg by nebulizer after dissolving the solution
in 3 ml saline; can be repeated every 4-6 hourly as required. (No role of antibiotics, steroids,
ribavirine inhalation in uncomplicated patients).
 If adrenaline not available, salbutamol inhalation (0.15 mg/kg dissolved in 3 ml soln.) may be
tried and continued if response observed.
 Syr. paracetamol 10-15 mg/kg dose may be given 4-6 hourly.
 Do not use sedatives.
 Monitor improvement in respiratory rate, lower chest indrawing, difficulty in feeding,
excessive crying, cyanosis and oxygen saturation, if available, every 4-6 hours till there is
significant improvement. If child does not improve/deteriorate look for underlying heart
disease i.e., myocarditis/congenital heart disease and get an X-ray chest and look for massive
collapse of lung/infection/pneumothorax etc. and manage accordingly.
Patient education
 Mother should be educated about the signs of pneumonia i.e., rapid respiratory rate, chest
indrawing, difficulty in feeding.
 Mother should be educated about identification of danger signals in a child suffering from
pneumonia and report immediately to the health care facility.
 Inhaled systemic steroids have not been recommended for the treatment of acute
bronchiolitis.
382

Pediatric Conditions
PNEUMONIA
It is the inflammation of lung parenchyma. Pneumonia is responsible for 20% of under 5
mortality in India. The etiological agents vary with the age of the patient. Less than three
months: Gram negative bacteria and Group B streptococcus, 3 months to 5 yrs. S.pneumonie,
H.influenza, Staph.aureus, viruses, and >5 years S.pneumonie, M.pneumonie, viruses.
Salient features
 Classified as mild to very severe disease.
- No pneumonia-no fast breathing and no indicators of severe or very severe pneumonia.
- Pneumonia - fast breathing e.g. age below 2 months > 60 RR/min; 2 months- 12 months >
50 RR/min; 12 months - 60 months > 40 RR/min and no indicators no indicators of severe
or very severe pneumonia.
- Severe pneumonia - lower chest indrawing or nasal flaring and no signs of very severe
pneumonia.
- Very severe pneumonia - central cyanosis or not able to breastfeed or drink or convulsions
or lethargy or unconsciousness or severe respiratory distress (e.g. head nodding).
 Diagnosis: chest X ray need not be done routinely if no complication (pleural effusion, no
improvement) suspected. Children up to 3 months of age and children with severe
pneumonia are treated as in patient with parenteral antibiotics.
Pharmacological treatment
 For non-severe pneumonia (domicillary oral treatment and follow up)
- Patients with age more than 2 months and with absence of features of severe pneumonia can
be treated at home.
Tab/Syr. amoxicillin 20-40 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses for 7 - 10 days or Tab/Syr.
cephalexin 20-40 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses for 5-7 days. Or chloramphenicol 50-100
mg/kg/day in 4 doses for 7-10 days.
- For severe pneumonia and children up to 3 months of age (Hospitalisation and IV
antibiotics.) Up to 3 months (for 7-10 days)
- Inj. cefotaxime 100 mg/kg/day 2 divided dose or Inj. cefuroxime 100 mg/kg/day in 2 divided
doses for 7 –10 days or Inj. ampicillin 100 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses PLUS
- Inj. gentamicin 5-7.5mg/kg/day 2 divided dose
 For severe pneumonia – age 3 months to 5 years, First line for 7 to 10 days
Inj. ampicillin IV 100 mg/kg/day in 4 divided dose or Inj. chloramphenicol 50-100
mg/kg/day in 4 divided doses
Second line- Inj. cefotaxime 150-200 mg/kg/day.
 In all age group, if staphylococcal pneumonia is suspected, treat for 14 days.
Inj. cefotaxime/ceftriaxone Plus cloxacillin 100-200 mg/kg/day in 4 doses.
383

Pediatric Conditions
Follow up and monitoring
 Mild pneumonia- reassessed at 48 hours or earlier if child deteriorates. If child shows
improvement, continued same treatment for 5-7 days. If deteriorates, patient is
hospitalized and treated as severe pneumonia.
 Children who are hospitalized (severe and very severe pneumonia) are monitored more
frequently. Children with severe/very severe pneumonia (age >2 month) on deterioration
can be treated with cefotaxime/cefuroxime.
Patient education
 Explain the signs of pneumonia i.e., rapid respiratory rate, chest indrawing, difficulty in
feeding etc.
 Explain the danger signals in a child suffering from pneumonia.
THRUSH (ORAL CANDIDIASIS)
Salient features
 Oral candidiasis may be seen as early as 7-10 days of age (peak 4th week of life)
uncommon after 12 months of age, when it is secondary to broad-spectrum antibiotic.
 Thick white patches on an erythematous base in the oral mucosa may spread to involve
the lips, buccal mucosa, tongue and palate. Asymptomatic or may cause pain in the
mouth, discomfort, anorexia and decreased feeding. Rarely may cause aspiration
pneumonia.
 Diagnosis is confirmed by the fact that on removing the plaques, punctate areas of
bleeding are seen on the undersurface.
Non-pharmacological treatment
Correct faulty sterilization technique of feedingbottle; best to avoid bottle feeding.
Pharmacological treatment
 Clotrimazole 1% cream, gel or lotion, oral application 3-4 times/day after feeding for 5-
7days (or 1-2 days beyond recovery) Or miconazole gel 25 mg 4 times a day for 5-7
days. Or gentian violet 1% aqueous solution 1-2 times a day, for 5-7 days (can stain
tissues and clothes).
 In resistant/chronic cases (patients with major underlying disease) Tab. fluconazole 3-6
mg/kg once daily for 5-7 days. Or Tab. ketoconazole 3-6 mg/kg once daily for 5-7 days.
 In resistant recurrent/chronic thrush in a child with no obvious predisposing factor/ source
of infection, look for underlying endocrinopathy, immune disorder, AIDS and
malnutrition.
Patient education
 Emphasize on bottle hygiene, care/hygiene of the nipple and treatment of vaginal
candidiasis in expectant mother.
384

Pediatric Conditions
CONSTIPATION
Salient features
 Defined as the passage of hard stools that are difficult to pass irrespective of frequency.
However, passage of stool less than twice a week is considered as constipation. Genuine
hard stools may result from an inadequate milk intake, hunger stools, use of over-
strength artificial feeds and low roughage diet.
 True constipation may be due to imperforate anus, meconium plug, low intestinal
obstruction, Hirschsprung's disease, or hypothyroidism but most of the time it is
idiopathic.
 Symptoms include fretfulness, poor appetite, intermittent abdominal pain, distension.
Retentive posturing occurs with urge to defaecate, relieved after going to the toilet.
There maybe history of recurrent UTI. Weight gain may be impaired.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Dietary modification: Ensure adequate fluid intake in diet. In infants, breast milk should
continue as it is less likely to be constipating than cow's milk, can add extra sugar in
cow's milk if child is not breast-fed.
 Add fiber by cereals (wheat bran, oat), pulses, vegetables, salads and fruits and isabgol.
 Toilet training to achieve regular evacuation. Child is instructed to use bathroom after
breakfast or dinner, to take advantage of meal stimulated increase in colonic motility.
 Maintain calendar to record evacuations.
 Positive reinforcement (reward/appreciation) for successful toileting (no punishment for
failure).
Pharmacological treatment
 Agarol or lactulose in infants 2.5-10 ml/day; children 40-90 ml/day in 3-4
divided doses. Or mineral oil (liquid paraffin) 5-15 ml/kg/day Or milk of magnesia 0.5-3
ml/kg/day. Dose is titrated to produce at least one stool/day.
 Enemas may be used in severe cases where sufficient trial of medical therapy
has failed. To empty the bowel of faecoliths, enemas may be required daily or on
alternate days for initial few days.
 In severe cases with faecal soiling, in the initial stages: bowel cleaning/ disimpaction may
be required with enemas 1-2/day or suppositories 1-2/day. In very severe cases with
multiple faecoliths, failed medical treatment, mental retardation etc., surgical
disimpaction may be done.
 If a surgical cause is suspected patient should be investigated and treated accordingly.
The main objective of medical management is to dislodge faecal mass, overcome
withholding behaviour and promote regular bowel habits.
385

Pediatric Conditions
Patient education
 Importance of dietary modifications should be explained. Treatment should not be
abandoned early after recovery.
 Bowel training should have only positive reinforcements. Negative reinforcement should
be avoided at all costs.
ACUTE DIARRHOEA
Salient features
 Acute diarrhoea is defined as passage of 3 loose stools per day for duration of less than
7 days, and increased fluidity or volume of stools. It is caused commonly by Rotavirus,
E. coli, V. cholerae, Giardia or parenteral infections and invasive diarrhoea by Shigella,
Salmonella and E. histolytica.
 Clinical features of diarrhoea are frequent stools, vomiting, fever and dehydration.
 Dehydration is categorized into some dehydration and severe dehydration. In some
dehydration child is thirsty and drinks voraciously, active and alert but irritable, with
sunken eyes, depressed fontanelle, absent tears, loss of skin turgor and some decrease in
urine output. In severe dehydration all these are more severe except that child is
lethargic and does not want to drink water.
The following table lists the investigations that may be done if indication exists.
Table 9. Investigations in acute diarrhoea
Investigations Indications
Stool microscopy Dehydration or high fever, Diarrhoea persisting beyond 7
days, blood persisting in stool after 48 hour, of treatment
Blood urea, All 3 investigations in moderate to severe dehydration, SE in
S. electrolytes (SE) and persistent vomiting or signs of dyselectrolytaemia, ABG in
arterial blood gas (ABG) respiratory distress and no chest signs and sepsis (correct it
only if pH <7.25).
Infection screening by Fever persisting >72 hours, PEM > grade III or age <3
TLC, DLC, band cell count, months.
ESR and CRP
Blood culture Suspected sepsis, Before starting antibiotics.
Chest X-ray, CSF and others As and when required
Stool culture No role
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Maintain hydration by home available fluids (HAF) in place of or along with ORS. These
are rice, kanji, butter milk, dal soup, coconut water or weak tea etc. Soft drinks,
sweetened fruit drinks and tea are unsuitable and could be potentially dangerous.
386

Pediatric Conditions
 Maintain nutrition: continue breast feeding. Continue normal light diet e.g. khichri, dalia,
banana or mashed dal etc. Do not dilute or stop milk as there is not much role of lactose
intolerance or milk protein allergy. Give extra food during recovery.
Pharmacological treatment
 Low osmolarity oral rehydration solution (ORS) is used in some dehydration 75 ml/kg in
4 hours under observation.
 After 4 hours if dehydration is corrected, or if child was not dehydrated at presentation,
send home with instructions to give ORS in 2:1 dilution as accepted by the child. Asked
to report back if vomiting persists or urine is not passed for >8 hours. As a rough
guideline 10 ml/kg of ORS may be added for each large stool.
 If dehydration is not corrected after 4 hours, same amount of ORS may be repeated in
next 4 hours and if dehydration is corrected, send the patient home. If dehydration does
not improve in 8 hours or if it worsens, abandon oral rehydration therapy (ORT) and give
IV fluids.
 Zinc ORS is not superior to supplementation of zinc separately, in malnourished children
with diarrhoea.
 Principles of Oral Rehydration Therapy (ORT)
- Give in small sips.
- Vomiting is not a contraindication unless persistent.
- Contraindicated in altered sensorium or paralytic ileus.
- Stop as soon as diarrhoea stops.
 IV fluid therapy in case of severe dehydration or shock or contraindications or
failure of ORT. N/2 saline is given over 8 hours (1:100 ml KG after child passes
urine), as follows:
- Some dehydration-75 ml/kg.
- Severe dehydration-100 ml/kg (half in first 2-3 hours)
- Shock- push 20 ml/kg of Ringer's lactate or normal saline over 15 minutes and can repeat
twice more if shock persists use central venous pressure monitoring for further
management if shock present after pushing 60 ml/kg.
 Specific therapyis indicated -Frank blood and mucus in the stool or >10 pus cells/HPF
- Syr. ciprofloxacin 15-20 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses (Shigella strains are largely
resistant to ampicillin and cotrimoxazole) for 5 days
Giardiasis (only if trophozoites are seen on stool microscopy)
- Syr. metronidazole 15 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses for 5 days Or
- Syr. tinidazole 50 mg/kg/day single dose (max. 2 g)
Cholera (suspect in any child with severe watery diarrhoea)
Mainstay of treatment is fluid therapy and following antibiotic may be used to prevent
spread: Syr. doxycycline 5 mg/kg (max 200 mg) in single dose. Or Syr. furazolidone 5
mg/kg/day in 4 divided doses for 3 days. Or Syr. cotrimoxazole (TMP) 8 mg/kg/day in 2
divided doses for 5 days. Or Syr. erythromycin 30 mg/kg/day for 3 days.
387

Pediatric Conditions
 Severe infections to be treated by appropriate parenteral antibiotics.
 There is not much role of antiemetics in a child with vomiting. Rule out meningitis, URI
and dyselectrolytaemia and give ORS in sips. If vomiting persists give intravenous fluids.
However, occasionally 1 or 2 doses of metoclopramide (0.5 mg/kg) or domperidone (0.5
mg/kg) may be tried before giving intravenous fluids. Binding agents e.g., Kaolin pectin
etc. are not useful.
 Following drugs are contraindicated,
- Antimotility agents e.g. diphenoxylate, atropine etc. and antisecretory agents e.g.,
loperamide, salicylates etc.
 Keep record of vitals e.g. pulse, BP, capillary filling time (CFT), respiratory rate (1
hourly) and temperature (6 hourly). Monitor for improvement or worsening of signs of
dehydration. Record urine output and stool frequency and consistency.
 Modifications or step up treatment
- Admit if PEM grade III or age <3 months (as higher chances of complications e.g. shock,
hypoglycaemia etc.), associated severe systemic infections e.g. septicaemia, meningitis or
pneumonia.
- Investigate for lactose intolerance, incipient infections e.g., Urinary tract infection (UTI)
or rare gut organisms, if diarrhoea persists for >7 days.
- Exclude parenchymal renal failure, if child has not passed urine after hydration. Give a
fluid challenge (20 ml/kg of normal saline) followed by frusemide injection (1-2 mg/kg).
If urine is still not passed then parenchymal renal failure considered and managed
accordingly.
Patient education
 Inform natural course of diarrhoea to avoid dissatisfaction and ORS only prevents
dehydration i.e. purge rate and consistency usually improves by 3-7 days
 Explain the complications in diarrhoea are because of dehydration and thus ORS is the
mainstay of therapy. Explain preparation of ORS and method of administration.
Nutritional advice as mentioned earlier in non-pharmacological section. Education about
food and water hygiene.
ACUTE VIRAL HEPATITIS
It is a systemic infection affecting liver and is caused by Hepatitis A, B, C, D, E viruses etc.
Commonest causes for infective hepatitis among children are Hepatitis A and Hepatitis E.
Both of these are spread by faeco-oral route. Hepatitis B and C are more common in children
receivingblood product for certain chronic illnesses.
Salient Features
 Prodrome constituted by fever, malaise, nausea, emesis, anorexia and abdominal
discomfort may precede the appearance of jaundice. It may go unnoticed or may be
severe mimicking malaria or typhoid fever.
388

Pediatric Conditions
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Rest if the patient feels exhausted or fatigued (forced rest does not help and does not
shorten the time to recovery).
 Regular small frequent meals with high caloric content. High carbohydrate diets are
acceptable but should be hygienic. Traditionally sugarcane juice is used as home therapy
though it has no established benefit. Maintain adequate hydration in case of vomiting and
avoid fatty meals.
Pharmacological treatment
 There is no specific treatment for simple acute viral hepatitis. Uncomplicated cases can be
treated at home. If patient has frequent vomiting, oral metoclopramide 0.1 mg/kg/dose
can be given as and when required but not to be repeated before 6 hours.
 Usually fever abates after jaundice appears. Occasionally if the situation requires,
paracetamol may be used sparingly.
 Persistent high grade fever suggests alternative diagnosis. Hospitalization required only in
clinically severe illness e.g. alteration in sleep pattern, altered behaviour, abnormal
movements, persistent vomiting, dehydration, decreased urinary output, bleeding from
any site or any other complication.
Patient education
 Continue breast feeding or other regular feeding. Observe carefully for any danger signs
listed above. Usually a self limiting disease and fever subsides after the jaundice is
evident clinically. Most patients start recovering in 7-14 days time. Total duration of
illness is 3 weeks.
 Hepatitis A and B are two different diseases. Getting your child vaccinated with hepatitis
B vaccine will not protect you against Hepatitis A. Hepatitis A spreads through
contaminated food and water and close person to person contact.
 Raw or insufficiently cooked food (fruits, vegetables, salads) or cooked food handled by
an infected individual can be the source of hepatitis A infection.
CHICKENPOX OR VARICELLA
Varicella is the primary infection caused by varicella-zoster virus. It is highly infectious and
is transmitted by droplet infection. The incubation period is about 14 days.
Salient features
 Begins as crops of small red papules over the trunk appearing within 1 day of fever and
systemic symptoms which quickly develop into clear, often oval vesicles on an
erythematous base. Contents become cloudy in about 24 hours and then scab. Many
such crops may appear for 3-4 days.
 Bacterial superinfection, thrombocytopenia, arthritis, hepatitis, encephalitis or
meningitis can complicate the disease. The disease is severe in adolescents and adults
Non pharmacological treatment
as well as immune compromised individual. Reactivation disease results in herpes
zoster or shingles.
389

Pediatric Conditions
Itching is bothersome and scratching effect may be minimized by making the patient wear
mittens. Daily change of clothes and good personal hygiene may decrease the risk of
secondary infection.
Pharmacological treatment
 For management of fever: Aspirin and other salicylates are contraindicated due to risk of
Reye's syndrome and should not be used.
 Local anti-pruritic agents like calamine lotion may alleviate itching. If itching is not
relieved with above. Tab. pheniramine 25 mg 2 times a day Or Tab. cetirizine: in
children (2-6 years) 5 mg; (>6 years) 10 mg once a day.
 In case of immuno-compromised children on long term treatment with steroids, anti-
cancer drugs or other immunosupressive therapy, HIV positive patients, children older
than 12 years of age, those with chronic cutaneous or pulmonary disorders who are at
increased risk of severe disease, oral acyclovir if started within few hours (<24 h) of the
onset of rash may decrease the duration, magnitude of fever as well as the number of skin
lesions.
 Tab. acyclovir 20 mg/kg/ day is given 6 hourly for 5 days. In case the patient is severely
immuno-compromised or severe disease in adults, Inj. acyclovir should be started as soon
as possible in all cases at the dose of 10 mg/kg 8 hourly IV for 7 days.
Assessment of response to therapy
 Most cases will stop having fever after the initial 3-4 days when new crops of vesicle stop
appearing. The vesicles normally heal by scabbing in about a week's time. Persistence of
fevermay suggest secondary infection.
Patient education
 The disease is self limiting in healthy children. Child should be excluded from day care or
school till after 6th day of the rash or till scabs are formed.
 Do not uses “over the counter” fever medicines as they may contain aspirin or other
salicylates.
 An expensive but potent vaccine is available for protection against the disease and can be
recommended only for those at risk of severe form of the disease and are
immunocompetent.
 Post exposure prophylaxis with Varicella Zoster Immunoglobulin (VZIG, specific
immunoglobulin) is recommended for the contacts that are severely immunocompromised
or pregnant (particularly in the first trimester).
390

Pediatric Conditions
MEASLES
Salient features
 It is characterized by fever, cough, coryza, conjunctivitis, an erythematous
maculopapular rash appearing on the 4th day of the illness, and a pathognomonic
enanthem (Koplik spots). Rash starts from behind the ears, along the hairline, involve
the face and then the trunk and the limbs.
 Fever usually subsides after the appearance of the rash unless there is some
complication such as otitis media, bronchopneumonia, laryngotracheobronchitis
(croup), and diarrhoea. Acute encephalitis, which frequently results in permanent brain
damage, occurs in approximately 1 in every 1000 cases.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Isolate from others particularly unimmunized children for at least four days after the
appearance of the rash.
 Bed rest and cold sponging may be required for febrile patients.
 Small frequent feeds and plenty of oral fluids should be continued.
Pharmacological treatment
No specific antiviral treatment is available. Fever is managed with oral paracetamol.
Treatment of other co-existing problems
 Inj. vitamin A 100,000 IU or high dose oil based oral preparation (50,000 IU) is given IM
for 2 consecutive days. A third dose may be given 4 weeks later particularly if there are
manifesting signs of vitamin A deficiency.
 Treat appropriately secondary bacterial infection like bronchopneumonia and or
gastrointestinal infection.
Patient education
 The disease leads to marked anorexia and also often precipitates protein energy
malnutrition (PEM) and other deficiencies. Regular frequent feeds must continue. Extra
meal should be added during convalescence.
 The disease usually lasts 10-12 days and the maximum risk of infectivity is 5 days prior
to and 4 days after the appearance of rash. The rash usually heals by desquamation and
often leaves some hyperpigmented stains on the body which disappears over weeks
subsequently.
 The parents must report to the hospital in case the child develops any of the following
warning signs:
- Stiff neck, convulsions (seizures), extreme drowsiness, loss of consciousness or altered
behaviour.
- Rapid and or laboured breathing, difficulty in feeding, cyanosis.
- Significant dehydration as evident by sunken eyes or fontanelles, loss of skin turgor,
dryness of tongue or lack of tears etc.
- Blood in stools.
391

Pediatric Conditions
 Vaccination against measles is recommended at 7- 9 months of life and a subsequent
booster with measles or MMR is mandated at 15 months of age particularly if the primary
immunization was done at less than 9 months of age. There is no role of giving measles
vaccination to a child who has already suffered from the disease.
 Unimmunized child below 5 year in contact with the patient may be immunized. Measles
vaccine, if used early, can prevent or decrease the severity of the disease in the secondary
contacts.
MUMPS
Mumps is a disease caused by a virus that can infect many parts of the body, especially the
parotid salivary glands.
Salient features
 The parotid glands become swollen and painful over a period of one to three days.
There is often a fever of up to 103°F (39.4oC), with headache and loss of appetite.
 Mumps can also involve the brain, pancreas and other organs. The involvement of these
organs signifies a severe disease and there is usually a recrudescence of high fever in
such situations in addition to organ specific symptoms.
 Meningoencephilitis is the commonest complication (250/100 000 cases). Other
complications are orchitis, epididymitis, oophritis, pancreatitis, thyroiditis, myocarditis,
deafness, optic neuritis and arthritis.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Child should be encouraged to drink plenty of fluids. Water, decaffeinated soft drinks and
tea are better tolerated than acidic fruit juices (like orange juice, grape fruit juice or
lemonade) that make parotid pain worse.
 Either warm or cold packs - whichever feels better- may be used to sooth the swollen
parotid glands.
Pharmacological treatment
 Most cases are treated symptomatically on OPD basis.
 Fever treated using non aspirin fever medications such as paracetamol (10-15 mg/kg/day
SOS or every 4-6 hours). These medicines will also help relieve pain in the swollen
parotid glands. (caution: aspirin is contraindicated in children with viral illnesses due to
risk of Reye's syndrome).
 Being a viral illness, antibiotics have no role. There is no specific therapy available.
 Patients with abdominal pain, testicular swellings or signs of raised intracranial tension
need to be admitted in the hospital.
Patient education
 Parents should be explained warning signs e.g. in boys, parents are told to watch for high
fever, with pain and swelling of the testicles.
392

Pediatric Conditions
 Watch for abdominal pain that can mean involvement of the pancreas in either sex, or
involvement of the ovaries in girls.
 Severe headache, stiff neck, convulsions (seizures), extreme drowsiness etc suggest CNS
involvement and need for admission to a tertiary level center.
 Recurrence of high grade fever (above 101°F/38.3°C) often heralds onset of the above
complication and can be used as an early referral sign.
 Children usually recover from mumps in about 10-12 days. First attack of mumps almost
always gives lifelong protection against another, therefore, such children do not benefit
from any immunization later.
 Mumps can be prevented by a vaccine which can be given alone, or as part of the mumps-
measles-rubella (MMR) vaccine given at the age of 15 months. Mumps vaccine is
effective in 75 to 95% of immunized persons.
ACUTE FLACCID PARALYSIS
Acute Flaccid Paralysis (AFP) is defined as any child aged <15 years, with acute onset of
flaccid paralysis without any obvious cause (e.g. severe trauma or electrolyte imbalance like
hypokalaemia). AFP is a notifiable disease and all cases must be reported to Nodal Officer
and District Surveillance Officer, NPSP Unit, Directorate of Family Welfare.
Salient features
 The paralysis is of acute onset (<4 weeks) and the affected limb(s) are flaccid (floppy
or limp). If the AFP is due to polio, then sensation is never affected.
 Pseudoparalysis due to pain in osteomyelitis, abscess, scurvy, unrecognized trauma
leading to contusions, slipped epiphysis or fractures etc can also mimic AFP.
Treatment for acute polio cases
All cases should be treated as below except patients with isolated single lower limb
involvement and reporting after 4 days of onset of paralysis and currently not progressing for
more than 48 hours.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Complete bed rest and correct positioning of the affected limbs in the optimal position as
follows: Hip - slight flexion, knee - 5 degrees flexion, foot - 90 degrees with support
against the soles. Both legs should be supported from the lateral sides with pillows or
rolled towels or salt/sand packs to prevent rotation.
 When pain subsides, passive movements of the joints for about 10 minutes, 2-3 times a
day.
 Warm water fomentation using hot packs with soaked towels wrapped around the affected
parts for about 10 minutes, 2-3 times a day help in relieving pain. If transient urinary
retention occurs, alternate hot and cold compresses over the suprapubic region.
Caution: No massage or intramuscular injections as it may further precipitate paralysis.
Watch for progression, particularly for the involvement of the respiratory muscles.
393

Pediatric Conditions
Pharmacological treatment
There is no specific drug therapy for polio. For fever and pain, use paracetamol or ibuprofen.
Referral to a tertiary care level center with a ventilatory support facilities if there is
progression of paralysis, respiratory distress, bulbar involvement, paralysis of upper limbs
which is <3 days old (there is higher risk of diaphragmatic involvement in such cases),
marked drowsiness or any other complication.
Patient education
 No dietary restrictions, however, continue breast feeding or other regular feeding.
 Paralysis progresses usually for about 4-7 days after onset. Recovery may start thereafter
over days to weeks with little recovery of strength after 6 months of illness. A regular
physiotherapy facilitates recovery of muscles. Note: Post polio residual paralysis should
be referred for rehabilitative services to an appropriate centre.
PERTUSSIS (WHOOPING COUGH)
The causative organism is Bordetella pertussis which leads to this respiratory disorder.
Salient features
 Beginning as a mild URTI (catarrhal stage), can progress to severe paroxysms of
cough, often with a characteristic whoop, followed by vomiting.
 The child runs out of breath with bulging eyes, flushed face, lacrimation. salivation,
protrusion of tongue and distension of the neck veins etc. Such episodes are
exhausting and precipitated by yawning, sneezing and eating.
Pharmacological treatment
 Syr./Tab. erythromycin, 40-50 mg/kg/day in 4 divided doses orally for 14 days initiated
early in the coryzal phase of the disease i.e. first 14 days of the illness may shorten the
course of whooping cough, which otherwise may last for weeks or months. Once the
paroxysms start, no antimicrobial have any benefit except for eradication of any
secondary pulmonary infection.
 In patients with severe coughing paroxysms salbutamol 1-2 mg/kg/ day in 3-4 divided
doses for a week or so may be tried.
 Severe cases particularly those <6 months of age and those with respiratory distress need
to be admitted for intravenous fluids and oxygen therapy.
Supportive therapy
 Oxygen therapy is required in severe cases with respiratory distress. Hydration should be
maintained with intravenous or oral fluids in adequate amounts (cough suppressants are
usually not helpful).
Patient education
 To continue feeding during the prolonged period of cough, adequate hydration and
nutrition to prevent onset of malnutrition.
394

Pediatric Conditions
 Antibiotic therapy must be continued for at least 14 days to prevent relapse of the disease,
even if they may not be providing any relief in the symptoms. All contacts below 7 years
of age must be given erythromycin for 14 days.
 Contact the doctor immediately if the patient develops listlessness, apnoea or seizures.
This is particularly more common in infants below 6 months.
 Immunization against pertussis is as triple antigen Diphtheria Pertussis Tetanus (DPT)
and 3 primary doses are routinely advised for all infants followed by a booster after 1.5
years and 4.5 years after the primary immunization.
CARDIAC FAILURE
Cardiac failure is defined as a state in which the heart cannot deliver an adequate cardiac
output to meet the metabolic needs of the body. Clinical presentation is dependent on age and
degree of cardiac reserve. Common causes according to age of presentation are: Neonate -
Severe anaemia, heart block, congenital heart disease e.g. hypoplastic left heart, coarctation,
left to right shunt and large mixing cardiac defects. Infant – Left to right shunt,
supraventricular tachycardia Children – Rheumatic fever, myocarditis, cardiomyopathy, acute
hypertension.
Salient features
 Exertional dyspnoea, poor weight gain, feeding difficulties, fast breathing with
improvement when upright, persistent cough and wheezing, excessive perspiration and
irritability, puffiness of face and pedal oedema.
 Tachypnoea, tachycardia, small volume pulse, peripheral cyanosis, pedal/facial/ sacral
oedema, hepatomegaly, raised JVP (appreciated well in older children), gallop rhythm,
cardiomegaly and failure to thrive.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Restricted activity and bed rest with upright posture depending on cardiac reserve.
 In severe CHF, dietary modifications in infants by increasing calories per feed. Breast-
feed supplementation, naso-gastric feed to avoid the exertion of active feeding.
 No added salt in diet and fluid restriction. Cold sponging in case of fever.
Pharmacological treatment
Identify and treat the underlying cause. Algorithm for treatment is shown in figure.
 Elixir/Tab. digoxin (Elixir 0.25 mg/5 ml, Tab. 0.25 mg)
Method of digitalization: 0.5 x digitalization dose initially, 0.25 x digitalizing dose 8 and 16
hours later.
Digitalizing dose: Newborn = IV, IM: 0.010 - 0.030 mg/kg divided or orally: 0.040 mg/kg
divided in fractions.
Infants = IV, IM 0.030 - 0.040 mg/kg or orally 0.050 mg/kg in fractions.
Children = IV, IM, PO: 0.010 -0.015 mg/kg in fractions.
395

Pediatric Conditions
 Maintenance dosage 24 hours after 1st fraction of digitalizing dose. Newborn = PO: 0.005
- 0.010 mg/kg/24 hours, divided every 12 hours. In infants and children orally 0.002 -
0.005 mg/kg/24 hours divided every 12 hours. (Caution: Avoid hypokalaemia during
therapy with digoxin)
 Tab. furosemide 1-2 mg/kg every 12 hourly (may need K supplement).
Or Tab. chlorothiazide 20-50 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses. Or Tab. spironolactone 1-3
mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses.
 In cases with regurgitant cardiac lesions like severe MR where reduction
in after load is required, Tab. captopril 0.1-0.2 mg kg/dose 8-12 hourly (maximum 4
mg/kg/day). Or Tab. enalapril 0.08-0.5 mg/kg/dose 12-24 hourly (maximum 1 mg/kg/
day).
 Patients with hypotension and low cardiac output should be referred to a higher center for
Inj. dopamine infusion (40 mg/ml) 2-20 mcg/kg/min prepared in normal saline or 5%
dextrose. Hypovolaemia should be corrected before infusion is started and BP is
monitored during the infusion. Or Inj. dobutamine infusion (250 mg/5 ml) 2- 20
mcg/kg/min. Both the drugs can be used simultaneously to have added response.
Patient education
 Decreased salt intake, sufficient rest and adequate sleep must be emphasized. Strict bed
rest is necessary only in severe cases. Semi-upright position during sleep may make the
patient more comfortable.
Figure 1. Algorithm for treatment of congestive cardiac failure
396

Pediatric Conditions
DIABETES MELLITUS
Salient features
 Most cases of DM in children are of insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM)
and have hyperglycaemia with glucosuria. While some present with classical
symptoms of polyphagia, polydipsia, polyuria and weight loss, many children at the
onset present in the state of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).
 Diagnosis is made by demonstration of hyperglycaemia (random plasma glucose
more than 200 mg/dl). Patients during DKA have moderate to severe dehydration
with plasma glucose levels usually more than 300 mg/dl, metabolic acidosis,
ketonuria and various electrolyte disturbances.
Diagnosis
Table shows the cut off levels of plasma glucose used for diagnosis of DM, while doing oral
glucose tolerance test (GTT)-after glucose dose of 1.75 g/kg of ideal body weight (maximum
75 g).
Table 10. Cut off levels of plasma glucose for diagnosis of diabetes mellitus
Impaired glucose tolerance Diabetes mellitus (DM)
* Symptoms of DM plus random plasma
Fasting glucose 110-125 mg/dl
glucose >200 mg/dl
Fasting plasma glucose >126 mg/dl
2 h plasma glucose during theOr
Or 2 h plasma glucose during the OGTT#
OGTT <200 mg/dl but < 140 mg/dl
>200 mg/dl
* Symptoms include polyuria, polydipsia & unexplained weight loss with glycosuria and
ketonuria # OGTT Oral glucose tolerance test
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Diet:
- Regularity of eating pattern is very important so that diet and insulin dosing is
synchronized.
- General nutritional guidelines are followed. Calorie mixture should have 55%
carbohydrates, 30% fat and 15% proteins.
- Avoid carbohydrate with refined sugars to prevent metabolic swings. Carbonated drinks
should be of sugar free variety.
- Fats derived from animal sources to be reduced and should be replaced by fats of
vegetable origin.
- Calorie intake should be split as 20% breakfast, 20% lunch, 30% dinner and 10% each for
3 snacks at mid morning, mid afternoon and evening.
 Physical activity and fitness:
- Usual exercises advised to diabetic children and adolescents include vigorous walking,
jogging, swimming, tennis etc.
397

Pediatric Conditions
- Though, diabetics can undertake any exercise, but unusual exercise may require modification
in insulin dosing. For the schedule day of unusual exercise, insulin dose may be reduced by
10-15%.
Pharmacological treatment
 Initial therapy:
Treatment is initiated in the hospital with fast acting (regular) insulin. At the onset of DM
(or after recovery from DKA) the dose of insulin is 0.5-1.0 unit/kg/day.
Inj. Regular insulin 0.1-0.25 units/kg subcutaneous injections are given 6-8 hourly before
meals.
- Simultaneous blood glucose level monitoring is done. One to two days therapy is required
to find out total daily insulin requirement. Once the patient stabilizes on 6 hourly insulin
injections, the patient is switched over to "2 daily injections" schedule.
- In "2 daily injections" schedule, the insulin is administered as follows:
Combinations of intermediate acting (usually lente) insulin and fast acting (regular)
insulin in the ratio of 2-3:1. Two third of total daily -dose is injected before breakfast and
one third before dinner. Each injection has combination of both types of insulin e.g., total
dose of insulin is 30 units -20 units (14 units lente and 6 units regular) are injected before
breakfast and 10 units (6 units lente and 4 units regular) are injected before dinner.
- Blood glucose levels are monitored before each meal and the dose of insulin adjusted
accordingly. Blood glucose levels should ideally be 80 mg/dl fasting and 140 mg/dl after
meals (acceptable range between 80 -240 mg/dl). Early morning 3 AM blood glucose
level should be more than 70 mg/dl.
 Modification in the insulin doses:
- Modification in the insulin doses will be required depending upon the blood glucose
levels. Any increase or decrease in insulin dose is by 10 - 15% (generally not more than 6
units).
- After initial stabilization, newly diagnosed cases may have gradual decline in insulin
requirement even upto 0.5 units/kg/day. This may persist for several weeks to several
months.
- Decrease total dose of insulin by 10% at the time of discharge from hospital as the
increased activity at home will decrease the insulin requirement.
 Assessment of diabetic control or response to therapy
- Blood glucose estimation should be done before each meal and at bed time in the first few
weeks afterdiagnosis. After stabilization, it can be reduced to twice a week.
- Periodically blood glucose estimation at 3-4 AM is required to detect early morning
hypoglycaemia.
- Urine for sugar is also monitored initially 3-4 times daily before meals. Urine for ketones
once daily should be done.
398

Pediatric Conditions
- Glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA estimation-once every 3 months. - levels of 6-9%
1c
represent very good control of diabetes, 9 -12% show fair control and above 12%
represent poor control.
- Serum lipids -cholesterol, HDL, LDL, VLDL, triglycerides and urine for protein should
be done once every year. Serum cholesterol should be less than 200 mg/dl, LDL less than
130 mg/dl and triglycerides less than 140 mg/dl.
- Thyroid function tests should be done once every year to detect concomitant
hypothyroidism.
Patient education
 Patient/parents should be taught self diabetic care which should include: Technique of
measuring insulin in the syringe. Importance of drawing insulin always in the same
sequence (usually regular insulin first) so that same type of insulin is left over in the dead
space of the syringe. Explain technique of subcutaneous injections and importance of
rotating the injection sites -arms, thighs (upper and lower), buttocks and abdomen.
 Adherence to diet and regular exercise. Recognizing the symptoms of hypoglycaemia and
its home management.
HYPOTHYROIDISM
Salient features
 Most cases in children are due to congenital hypothyroidism causes such as aplasia,
hypoplasia or ectopia of thyroid gland. Common causes of acquired hypothyroidism are
iodine deficiency, lymphocytic thyroiditis and following irradiation of cervical region
for malignant disorders.
 The diagnosis is quite often missed in the initial months; hence neonatal screening is
important. The diagnosis is based on demonstration of low serum T4. Serum T3 levels
may be normal and are not useful for diagnosis. In primary hypothyroidism, TSH is
elevated. Radionuclide scans are not essential for diagnosis but help to delineate the
exact etiology.
Pharmacological treatment
 Thyroxin treatment should be started as soon as the diagnosis has been confirmed by thyroid
function tests (preferablythe same day as the evaluation).
 There remains some controversy regarding the initial starting dose of thyroxin and how
quickly the Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) should be normalized. A recommended
starting dose is approximately 10-15 mcg/kg/day.
 The initial dose for first 7 days may be on the higher end (14 mcg/kg/day) and then reduced
to lower level (10 mcg/kg/day) and then tapered to 5-7 mcg/kg/day by 1st year.
399

Pediatric Conditions
Table 11. Guideline for dosage of L-thyroxinein children
Age Dose in (mcg/kg/day)
0-6 months 8-15
6-12 months 7-10
1-5 years 5-7
5-10 years 3-5
10-12 years 2-4
Assessment of response
 Early response is evident in initial few weeks with symptomatic improvement in
alertness, relief of constipation, improvement in appetite and feeding. Increased linear
growth and osseous maturation is seen over next few months.
 The child should be followed clinically every month for 6 months, 3 monthly till 2 years
and thereafter once to twice every year. Recurrence of symptoms such as lethargy,
constipation and weight gain suggest under treatment and diarrhoea, palpitations,
increased appetite and weight loss suggest overdosing. Periodic check on thyroid
function tests is needed (6 monthly or so). Serum T4 level should be maintained in upper
normal range and TSH levels suppressed to normal.
 After few months of starting therapy, sometimes features suggestive of raised intracranial
tension such as headache and vomiting may appear. The patient should be immediately
admitted and treated.
Patient education
 Need for life long administration of the drug. Regular follow up at the interval described,
important for proper monitoring and dose titration.
 Clinical symptoms of under or overdosage, including the danger signs of pseudotumour
cerebri should be explained. In infants, thyroxine should be given by crushing the tablet
with little milk or water, using a teaspoon or syringe. It should never be added to a bottle
of milk or formula, as this reduces the bioavailability of thyroxin significantly. The
dosage should be repeated if the baby vomits or regurgitates immediately afterwards.
400

Pediatric Conditions
URINARY TRACT INFECTION (UTI)
Salient features
 It is a common bacterial infection in infants and children. It can be a presenting feature
of underlying structural or functional abnormality of the urinary tract or associated with
renal parenchymal damage, hypertension, and chronic kidney disease. All patients with
recurrent UTI are more at risk and should be investigated and managed thoroughly.
- Ask about bowel bladder habits, checking BP and examining the genitals for
phimosis/balanitis/labial adhesion and spine. High risk factors for underlying structural
abnormality, bladder voiding dysfunction and/or chronic kidney disease is: UTI in
infant, severe symptoms (fever, loin pain, vomiting, poor response to initial
management) or septicaemia
- Recurrent UTI - Indication of bladder anomaly: severe constipation, urinary dribbling,
poor urinary stream, straining, palpable bladder, renal disease: stunting, raised
creatinine, hypertension, flank mass
Pharmacological treatment
 Patients less than 3 months of age, systemically toxic with high fever, loin pain and
vomiting, and with underlying structural abnormality of urinary tract, are better treated as
inpatients and with parenteral antibiotics. All other patients can be treated as outpatients
with oral antibiotics.
 The initial antibiotic choice should be guided by local culture and sensitivity report
return. The duration of therapy is 10-14 days for infants and children with complicated
UTI, and 7-10 days for uncomplicated UTI. Adolescents with cystitis may be treated
with shorter duration antibiotics. Hydration must be maintained with oral or IV fluids as
required.
 Analgesics and antipyretics are used as per necessity.
 Patients with obstructive uropathies may need urgent drainage without which resolution
of UTI may be difficult.
 Maintain adequate hydration and encourage liberal fluid intake to alleviate dysuria. The
antibiotics suggested for the treatment of UTI is as follows:
Table 12. Antibiotics suggested for the treatment of UTI in children
Medication Dose, mg/kg/day
Parenteral
Cefriaxone 75-100, in 1-2 divided doses IV
Cefotaxime 100-150, in 2-3 divided doses IV
Amikacin 10-15, single dose IV or IM
Gentamicin 5-6, single doses IV or IM
Comaxiclav 30-35 of amoxicillin, in 2 divided doses IV
Oral
401

Pediatric Conditions
Cefixime 8-10 in 2 divided doses
Amoxicillin 30-50of amoxicillin, in 3 divided doses
Ciprofloxacin* 10-20, in 2 divided doses
Ofloxacin* 15-20, in 2 divided doses
Cephalexin 50-70, in 2-3 divided doses
* Fluoroquinolones should be avoided as first line medication; their use should be guided by
results of culture and sensitivity.
Monitoring and follow-up of high risk patients
 An abdominal USG and repeat urine culture are necessary in patients who fail to show
clinical response (reduction of fever and toxicity) within 48 hours of initial treatment.
 Child with more than one episode should be worked up for cause of recurrent UTI. Each
episode is treated as mentioned above but child should be investigated in detail with
ultrasound, Micturating Cystourethrogram(MCU) and DMSA scan.
 High risk patients are likely to have underlying abnormalities. Such patients must be
identified early by careful history and examination and investigated. Many of these
patients have recurrent UTI. Underlying vesico-ureteric reflux and bladder-bowel
elimination disorders are the most common etiologies, and specific management
depending on cause has to be initiated.
Antibiotic prophylaxis
Antibiotic prophylaxis has been recommended in the following situations:
 UTI below 1-yr age, while awaiting imaging studies
 Vesico urethral reflux
 Frequent febrile UTI even if the urinary tract is normal.
Antibiotic prophylaxis is not advised in patients with urinary tract obstruction, urolithiasis
and neurogenic bladder, and inpatients on clean intermittent catheterization.
Antibiotics for prophylaxis of urinary tract infections in children
Drug Dose (mg/kg/day) Remarks
Cotrimoxazole 1-2 (trimethoprim) Avoid in infants <3 months age and G-6PD
deficiency
Nitrofurantoin 1-2 Gastrointestinal upset; avoid in infants <3 months
age, G-6 PD deficiency and renal insufficiency
Cephalexin 10 Drug of choice in first 3-6 months of life
Long-term follow-up
Patients with recurrent UTI, renal scars, or risk factors mentioned above need long-term
monitoring. Patients are advised to have plenty of oral fluids, void regularly, avoid
constipation and maintain perianal hygiene. They should check a clean midstream urine after
local cleansing if any recurrence of fever/any urinary or other symptoms suggestive of UTI.
402

Pediatric Conditions
POSTSTREPTOCOCCAL ACUTE GLOMERULONEPHRITIS (AGN)
Salient features
 Commonest type of post infectious acute glomerulonephritis
 Immunological disease occurring after group A beta hemolytic streptococcal throat or
skin infection resulting in diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis.
 Sudden onset of hematuria, oliguria, edema and hypertension.
 Children between 5-10 years are commonly affected.
 Investigations reveal raised urea, creatinine, positive tests for streptococcal infection,
low C3 level.Renal biopsycan be donein severe and prolonged case of AGN.
 Complications include hyperkalemia, acute renal failure, hypertensive encephalopathy
and severe fluid overload causing pulmonary edema.
Treatment
 Monitoring of fluid intake, output, blood pressure, urea, creatinine and electrolytes
required on regular basis. Complete blood count, Anti Streptolysin O Titre (ASOT), C3,
renal ultrasound should be performed at presentation.
 Fluid restriction to urine output and insensible losses.
 Inj.Procaine penicillin 4 lac units once daily if evidence of sore throat or skin infection.
 Potassium restriction
 Treatment of complications such as hyperkalemia, hypertension and fluid overload. If
conservative management of these complications is not sufficient for control, early
dialysis should be initiated.
 Treatment of acute hyperkalemia
1 Restrict K intake
2 Transient reversal of cardiotoxicity with calcium gluconate(10%) 1ml/kg in distilled
water, slow IV infusion
3 Temporary reduction of potassium in extracellular fluid with:
Nebulised salbutamol
Sodium Bicarbonate : 1-2 mmol/kg
Glucose (0.5g/kg) + insulin (0.1U/kg) infusion
4 Removal of potassium from the body by:
Frusemide (1-2 mg/kg)
Potassium exchange resins(1g/kg/day)
Dialysis
Patient education
Parents should be explained the natural course. More than 95% recover within 2 – 4 weeks.
Only a few patients may end up with chronic renal insufficiency.
403

Pediatric Conditions
NEPHROTIC SYNDROME
Nephrotic syndrome is an important chronic disorder in children. It can be primary
(idiopathic) or secondary (SLE, Henoch Schonlein purpura, amyloidosis etc). About 90%
children with idiopathic nephrotic syndrome have 'minimal lesion' on renal histology and
respond promptly to corticosteroids. Approximately three fourth patients have one or more
relapses. Steroid toxicity and frequent serious infection complicate such cases.
Salient features
 Heavy proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia (S, Albumin <2.5 g/dl), hyperlipidemia (S.
cholesterol >200 mg/dl) and oedema. Dipstick or heat coagulation of urine shows
3+/4+ proteinuria.
 Investigations which help in diagnosis and management are urine analysis, blood
counts, S. cholesterol, S. proteins, blood urea, S.creatinine, urine culture, X-ray chest,
Mantoux, HBsAg.
Pharmacological treatment
Definitions useful for guiding treatment are as follows:
- Remission:Urine albumin nil or trace (or proteinuria <4 mg/m2/h) for 3 consecutive days.
- Relapse: Urine albumin 3+ or 4+ (or proteinuria >40 mg/m2/h) for 3 consecutive days
having been in remission previously.
- Frequent relapses: Two or more relapses in six months of initial response, or more than
three relapses in any twelve months.
- Steroid dependence: Two consecutive relapses when on alternate day steroids or within
14 days of its discontinuation.
- Steroid resistance: Absence of remission despite therapy with 4 weeks of daily
prednisolone in a dose of 2 mg/kg per day
 Steroid Sensitive Nephrotic Syndrome (SSNS)
- The first episode: Prednisolone 2 mg/kg/day (or 60 mg/m2/day) after food for 6 weeks,
followed by 1.5 mg/kg/alternate day (or 40 mg/m2/alternate day) for 6 weeks.
- Infrequent relapses: Prednisolone 2 mg/kg/day until remission followed by 1.5
mg/kg/day for 4 weeks.
- Frequent relapses and steroid dependant (SDNS): the following options are used
successively.
- Prednisolone for achievement of remission followed by maintenance of a low dose (<than
0.5 mg/kg) on alternate day basis for 12-18 months.
- Levamisole 2.5 mg/kg/alternate day for 6 to 24 months. Monitoring of CBC is required 1-
2 monthly.
- Cyclophosphamide (CP) 2-3 mg/kg/day for 2-3 months to achieve a cumulative dose of
168 mg/kg. CBC monitoring is required 1-2 weekly.
- Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 20-30 mg/kg/day
- Tacrolimus (TAC) 0/1-0.2 mg/kg/day
404

Pediatric Conditions
- Cyclosporine A (CSA) 3-5 mg/kg day
- Rituximab (RTX) is a relatively new and potent therapy which is used only rarely for
extremely difficult cases that does not respond to other options.
- Note: A renal biopsy is advised before starting TAC or CSA. Immuno-suppressive
therapy requires supervision by paediatric nephrologist and monitoring of hemograms
(for all), liver function (MMF and TAC) and glucose and magnesium levels (TAC), renal
function (TAC and CSA) and drug levels (MMF, TAC, CSA).
Figure 2. Treatment of steroid sensitive nephritic syndrome without hypertension,
hematuria and azotemia
Supportive Treatment
 Detect and treat infections rapidly.
 Mobilize the patient early
 Antacids, H2 receptor blockers or proton pump inhibitors are often prescribed along with
steroids but they are no definite evidence to support this in patients who do not have any
symptoms of gastritis.
 Calcium and vitamin D supplements may be used to reduce osteopenic effects of steroids,
however definitive evidence and guidelines are not yet available.
 Diet: Avoid excessive salt intake in edematous patient. A balanced diet with less than
30% fats and at least 2 gm/kg/day protein is advised.
 Edema should be treated cautiously with diuretics while closely monitoring hypovolemia
and renal function.
 Hypovolemia should be detected rapidly and treated by fluids and colloids.
 Patients who are chronically nephritic may have hyperlipidemia which is managed by diet
and if persistent, with statins.
 Hypertension should be controlled and BP maintained below 90th percentile of age.
405

Pediatric Conditions
 Complete immunization when the patient is in remission. Vaccinate for varicella and
pneumococcus. Avoid live vaccines during immunosuppressive therapy and for 3 months
after cessation.
 Stress dose of hydrocortisone (2-4 mg/kg/day) should be used in patients who have
received high dose steroids for 2 weeks or more in the past year, when they present with
serious infections or other critical illnesses, or if undergoing major surgery.
Follow up and monitoring
 Monitor urinary protein at home and attend if it is 2+ or more
 Monitor blood pressure, growth and eye examination yearly
 Urine output and weight record
Parent education
 Assurance that despite a relapsing course, progression to end stage renal disease is rare
 Urine examination by sulfosalicylic acid (SSA), dipstick or boiling should be taught.
 Maintain adiary showing proteinuria and medication received.
 Ensure normal activity.
 Protection against infection
FEBRILE SEIZURES
Febrile seizures are brief (2-5 min), generalized tonic-clonic and self limited seizures
followed by a brief post-ictal period of drowsiness, in a febrile child of 6 months to 5 years of
age, without any underlying neurological disease. They occur rarely before 6 months and
after 5 year of age. The peak age of onset is approximately 14 -18 months of age, found in 3-
4% of young children. There is a strong family history of febrile convulsions in siblings and
parents, suggesting a genetic predisposition. Except for the cases at high risk, simple febrile
seizures rarely develop into epilepsy.
Salient features
 Febrile seizures usually occur when the temperature is rising rapidly, to generally 39°C
(102°F) or more of core temperature.
- They are of two types: Typical (Simple) febrile seizure occurs on day 1 of fever, does
not last for more than 10 minutes; Atypical or complex febrile seizure may persist for
more than 15 minutes; it could be focal in nature; more than one episode of seizure in
24 hours; associated with abnormal neurological findings or deficits. An organic cause
such as an infectious or toxic process should be considered and investigated.
 Examination of CSF is to rule out possibility of meningitis in cases with first episode of
febrile seizures.
 EEG is not required in a simple case of febrile seizures. However, in cases with atypical
febrile seizure or in a child with high risk for developing epilepsy, it may be helpful.
406

Pediatric Conditions
Non-pharmacological treatment
Clear the airway, semi-prone lateral position and oxygen therapy.
Pharmacological treatment
Most febrile seizures are brief and would be over by the time a child is brought to the doctor
or health facility. Careful search for the cause of fever and treat fever.
 In cases presenting with seizures, the mainstay of management is prompt administration
of anticonvulsants.
 The best drug is diazepam in a dose of 0.3 mg/kg by slow intravenous or rectal route. It
can be repeated if seizures do not subside (per rectal dose may be given up to 0.5
mg/kg/dose). Lorazepam can be used as an alternative.
Intermittent prophylaxis (during febrile illness)
Tab/Syr. diazepam 0.3 mg/kg/dose every 8 hours (1 mg/kg/day) for 2-3 days of febrile
illness, started on the day of onset of fever. Dose can be adjusted if over sedation or ataxia
noted.
Continuous prophylaxis
Phenytoin and carbamazepine are ineffective for prophylaxis and phenobarbitone has serious
effects on cognitive function. Sodium valproate is effective but potential risk does not justify
its use.
Patient education( parents/care taker)
 Assure the benign nature of the disease with no neurological deficit or mental retardation
as a result of simple febrile seizure. Teach to control of fever and to give diazepam per
rectally at home.
 Routine immunization as per schedule should be followed. After DPT vaccination, oral
paracetamol 15 mg/kg/dose every 6 h for 2 or 3 days and similarly, after measles
vaccination, oral paracetamol in the same dose started on the 4th day from the day of
vaccination and given for 3 to 4 days to avoid precipitation of febrile seizures.
ACUTE PYOGENIC MENINGITIS (CSF or clinically proven)
Acute meningitis is an acute inflammatory process involving brain tissue, due to infectious
causes. The common aetiological agents are viruses and bacteria. Children of any age may be
affected.
Salient features
 Fever, headache, vomiting, irritability, altered state of consciousness, signs of
meningeal irritation and seizures. CSF examination differentiates the viral from
bacterial causes.
407

Pediatric Conditions
Diagnosis
Table 13. CSF findings in meningitis
Pressure Protein
Leucocytosis (mm3) Glucose (mg/dl)
(mmH 0) (mg/dl)
2
>50 or 75%
Normal 50-80 <5,>75% Lymphos 20-45
serum glucose
Acute bacterial Usually elevated 100-10,000 PMN's*
100-500 Decreased (<40)
meningitis (100-300) predominate
Rarely >1000 PMN's
Acute viral
early but Lymphos Normal rarely-
meningo- Normal or elevated 50-200
predominate in the most decreased
encephalitis
of the course
Tubercular 100-500 PMN's early but
meningo- Usually elevated later lymphocytes 100-3000 <50
encephilitis predominate
Pharmacological treatment
Supportive treatment is the mainstay of therapy and is started immediately.
 Maintain airway, breathing and circulation.
 Control seizures with IV injection of diazepam 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg stat followed by inj.
phenytoin 10 –20 mg/kg stat followed by 5 mg/kg/day in divided doses.
 Increased intracranial tension is treated by proper positioning of the patient with head
elevated at 15 – 30º position, fluid restriction to 2/3rd of maintenance, 20% mannitol 5
ml/kg over 10 –15 mins. followed by 3 ml/kg every 6 hours for 48 hours and then SOS
Or glycerine 1 ml/kg/day through feeding tube may be added if increased intracranial
tension persists.
 Fever is controlled as given in section of fever (do not give aspirin).
 The intravenous fluid is two thirds of the maintenance requirement initially.
 Feeding: Initially the patient is kept nil orally for the first 24 – 48 hours. Later on the
feeding is guided by the level of sensorium. Tube feeding is helpful for feedings as well
as giving medicines.
Specific Management
 Until a bacterial cause is excluded, parenteral antibiotic therapy should be administered.
The choice of antibiotics depends upon age of the patient and prevalence of organism in
the area.
Age 0-3 months
 Inj.cefotaxime 200 mg/kg/day IV in 4 divided doses for 14 days.
 Inj.ampicillin 300 mg/kg/day IV in 4 divided doses for 14 days.
408

Pediatric Conditions
Age 3 months -12 years
 Inj. ceftriaxone 100 mg/kg/day IV in 2 divided doses for 10 days
Or Inj. cefotaxime 200 mg/kg/day IV in 3 divided doses for 10 days Or Inj ampicillin
300 mg/kg/day IV in 4 divided doses for 10 days
 Inj.chloramphenicol 100 mg/kg/day in 4 divided doses for 10 days
 If Meningococci is suspected/isolated Inj. penicillin G 300,000 - 400,000 IU/kg/ day in 4
divided doses for 7-10 days.
Advice at discharge
 Regular follow up for neurological assessment including deafness is advised.
 Anticonvulsant therapy to be continued if seizures are recurrent during course of
meningitis. Children with sequelae would require assessment of handicap and
multidisciplinary management. Physiotherapy may be taught during hospital stay itself.
TUBERCULAR MENINGITIS (TBM)
It is the inflammation of the meninges due to lymphohematogenous spread of the primary
infection of tuberculosis.
Salient Features
 Clinical progression is in three stages: 1st stage– lasts for 1 – 2 weeks, characterized
by non specific symptoms, fever, headache, irritability, drowsiness, malaise. 2nd stage
– begins more abruptly with common features of lethargy, neck rigidity, seizures,
positive Kernig or Brudzinski’s sign, cranial nerve palsies and other focal
neurological signs. 3rd stage – marked by coma, hemiplagia or paraplegia, decerebrate
posturing, deterioration of vital signs and eventually death.
 Complications include motor deficits, cranial nerve deficits, mental retardation,
seizures, hydrocephalus, blindness etc.
Diagnosis
 CSF on lumbar puncture which shows lymphocytic leucocytosis with elevated proteins
and a low sugar level. Demonstration of AFB in the CSF confirms the diagnosis but the
yield is very poor.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Nutrition rehabilitation should be done as given in section on protein energy malnutrition.
 Skin care and prevention of bedsores. Care of bowel and bladder.
 Physiotherapy and occupational therapy should be instituted early to prevent deformities
and contractures.
Pharmacological treatment
 Appropriate fluid therapy to correct dehydration due to frequent vomiting and decreased
oral intake.
409

Pediatric Conditions
 Inj. dexamethasone: 0.15 mg/kg IV 6 hourly for 2 weeks followed by Tab. prednisolone
1.5 mg/kg/day orally through feeding tube for 4 weeks. This should be tapered over
another 2 weeks. A total of 6-8 weeks therapy with steroid is recommended.
 Mannitol (20% solution) 1.5 to 2 g/kg or 8-10 ml/kg over 30-60 minutes. Repeated every
6-8 hours for 7 days. Lower doses (0.25 g/kg/dose) can also be tried. Or Glycerol 1
ml/kg/dose every 6-8 hours, diluted in orange juice or water, given through feeding tube.
Or Tab. acetazolamide 50 mg/kg/day, in 3 divided doses for 2-3 weeks.
 Presence of seizures necessitates treatment with phenytoin or carbamazepine in
appropriate doses.
 Specific antitubercular therapy- as given in management of tuberculosis
 Surgical Treatment - Ventriculoperitoneal Shunt (VP Shunt): TBM shows some degree of
hydrocephalus by 4 weeks. Obstructive hydrocephalus should be shunted immediately.
Non obstructive hydrocephalus with increased intracranial pressure as shown by
ventricular tap or CT scan will also be benefited by VP shunt. An early shunt is
preferable.
Follow up
 Patient should be kept under follow up after discharge from the hospital and assessed for
neurological deficit and features of increased intracranial pressure (ICP). One of the
common causes of increased ICP is untreated hydrocephalus or blocked shunt.
 Check compliance to drugs and ensure that occupational therapy/physiotherapy is being
continued.
 Assess physical, mental, visual and auditory handicap and consider rehabilitation from
specialists.
Patient education
 Seriousness of disease must be explained. Contact survey must be done and any other
members of the family found to have active TB should be counselled to attend TB clinic
for therapy.
 Need forcompliance must be explained.
STATUS EPILEPTICUS
It is a single epileptic seizure of >30 minute in duration or a series of epileptic seizures during
which consciousness is not regained between ictal events in a >30 min period (International
League against Epilepsy).
Pharmacological treatment
 Inj. Lorazepam 0.1 mg/kg (max 4 mg) @ 2 mg/min Or Inj. Midazolam 0.15-0.2 mg/kg
iv/im (max 5 mg), If iv access is not available, buccal midazolam 0.3 mg/kg (max 5 mg)
or perrectal diazepam 0.5 mg/kg (max 10 mg)
 Establish airway,breathing,circulation. Monitor cardiorespiratory status / oxygenation
 Investigations:
410

Pediatric Conditions
- Glucose,sodium,potassium,Calcium,magnesium,CRP,AEDlevel,LFT,RFT,
After 10 minutes,
 Inj. phenytoin 20 mg/kg in NS (max. 1000mg)@1 mg/kg/min Or Inj. fosphenytoinPE 20
mg/kg in NS @ 3 mg/kg/min
If no response,
 Repeat Inj. phenytoin 20 mg/kg in NS (max. 1000mg)@1 mg/kg/min
(Seizers occurring even after 10 mins. of phenytoin/ fosphenytoin administration refers to
refractory status)
At 25-30 mins.
 Inj. valproate 20 mg/kgiv @ 6 mg/kg/min or Inj. phenobarbitone 20 mg/kgiv @ 1.5
mg/kg/min
If no response after 35-45-mins.,
 Inj.phenobarbitone 10 mg/kg iv
HYPOVOLEMIC SHOCK
Hypovolemic shock, the most common cause in children is most frequently caused by
diarrhea, vomiting or hemorrhage. The etiology of hypovolemic shock includes blood Loss:
hemorrhage, burns, nephrotic syndrome, water/electrolyte loss-vomiting, and diarrhea
Pharmacological treatment
 IV or intraosseous access
 Rapid administration of 20 ml/kg of isotonic saline over 5-10 minutes.
 Repeat up to 60-80 ml/kg of isotonic saline if required; not unusual for severely affected
patient to require this volume in first hour.
 Shock refractory to this requires inotropic therapy with dopamine, dobutamine or nor-
epinephrine.
 Inj. dopamine: 3-20 microgram/kg/min IV or Inj. dobutamine: 1-10 microgram/kg/min IV
or Inj. nor-epinephrine: 0.05-1.5 microgram/kg/min
 In case of heamorrhagic shock stop ongoing blood loss, PCV may be required
 In case of nephrotic syndrome IV albumin is required.
 Treat diarrhea and vomiting with appropriate antibiotics, anti-emetics and H receptor
2
blockers or proton pump inhibitors.
DIPHTHERIA
Diphtheriais caused byCorynebacterium diphtheriae,
Salient features
 Fever of 38°C (100.4°F), chills, fatigue, sore throat, hoarseness, cough, difficulty
swallowing, painful swallowing, difficulty breathing, foul-smelling bloodstained nasal
discharge
411

Pediatric Conditions
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Hydration and maintain Airway–tracheotomy if hypoxia
Pharmacological treatment
 Inj. diphtheria Antitoxin 20000 to 100000 IU after test dose
 Inj. crystalline penicillin 1,00,000-1,50,000 IU/Kg/Day IV in 4 divided doses for 14 days
if patient allergic to penicillin erythromycin 40 mg/kg/day in 4 divided doses for 14 days
Prevention
 DTP as per immunization schedule
SEVERE MALARIA
Salient features
 Cerebral Malaria-failure to localize or respond to noxious stimuli (GCS </=8).
 Convulsion-More than 2 generalized convulsions within 24 hours despite cooling.
 Severe Normocytic normochromic anaemia - Hematocrit <15%,or hemoglobin
Minor Criteria
<5g/dl
 Acidosis –Arterial pH<7.25,plasma HCO <15mMo1/L, venous lactate > 6mMo1/L
3
 Renal failure - Urine output<0.5ml/kg/hr with no improvement on rehydration and
S.creat >3mg/dl
 Hypoglycemia- Whole blood glucose <40 mg/dl, Macroscopic hemoglobinuria
 Minor criteria- Impaired consciousness- Less severe alteration of sensorium should be
considered as correlate of cerebral malaria. Profound weakness unable to sit or walk
with no neurological explanation
 Hyperparasitemia -Parasite count >2,50,000/µl or >5% RBC’s parasitized
 Jaundice-Detected clinically or S.bilirubin >3 mg/dl
 Hyperpyrexia –Rectal temperature > 400
Pharmacological treatment
Choice of antimalarial drugs
Drug Dose Duration
Artesunate 2.4mg/kg IV f/b 1.2mg/kg after 12 & 24 hrs & then 5–7 days
daily till orally can be started(4mg/kg/day)
Quinine 20mg/kg IV loading of salt f/b 10mg/kg/dose q 8 hrly 7 days
till orally can be started
Primaquine 0.75mg/kg orally 1 day
Supportive therapy
 Preferably manage the patients in ICU.
 Clinical assessment with special attention to level of consciousness, BP, rate and depth of
respiration and pallor should be made.
412

Pediatric Conditions
 A good airway, semilateral position and nasogastric tube insertion in unconscious patients,
ventilatory support for children with Balyntyre score < 11 is necessary.
 Oxygen, IV fluids and ionotropes for management of shock.
 Anti-convulsants. Anti-pyretics.
 Blood products to be given as indicated.
 Fluid input and output, daily weight of the patient to be done. Temperature and vitals
monitoring. Frequent change of positions 2 hourly to avoid bed sores.
HYPERTENSIVE ENCEPHALOPATHY
Most commonly associated with renal disease in children, including acute
glomerulonephritis, chronic pyelonephritis and end-stage renal disease. In some cases may be
the initial manifestation of underlying renal disease. Cerebral vasoconstriction which is
caused by systemic hypertension leads to focal areas of cerebral edema and hemorrhage.
Salient features
 Acute seizures and coma or may manifest with headache, drowsiness and lethargy,
nausea and vomiting, blurred vision, transient cortical blindness and hemiparesis.
Pharmacological Treatment
Anti-hypertensives
Drug Dosage & route Side-effects
Nifidipine 0.25-0.5 mg/kg per dose (maximum dose 10 mg) Flushing,headache,
sublingual or oral q 6 hr tachycardia
Hydralazine 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM or IV repeat after 4-6 hr. For Flushing,headache,
maintenance 1.5-3.5 mg/kg/day in 4 divided doses tachycardia
PO
Reserpine 0.02 mg/kg/dose IM or PO q 12 hr, upto maximum Drowsiness, nasal
of 0.07 mg/kg or 1 mg congestion, GI bleeding
Diazoxide 1 mg/kg IV bolus, repeat q 15 min till blood Hyperglycemia
pressure is controlled or maximum dose of 5 mg/kg
is given
 Anti-convulsants
Drug Dosage &route Side-effects
Phenytoin 20 mg/kg IV slowly @ 25 mg/min Watch for hypotension and
followed by maintenance dose of 5 arrhythmia
mg/kg q 12 hr
Phenobarbitone 20 mg/kg loading dose IV @ Watch for respiratory
2mg/kg/min followed by maintenance depression
dose of 5 mg/kg q 12 hr
413

Pediatric Conditions
Diazepam 0.2-0.5 mg/kg IV bolus over 1-2 min Watch for respiratory
depression and hypotension
Lorazepam 0.05-0.1 mg/kg(max upto 4 mg) IV over Although little but there is risk
1-2 min of respiratory depression and
hypotension
Midazolam 0.2 mg/kg IV bolus. Respiratory depression.
 Treat underlying condition.
ACUTE SEVERE ASTHMA
An acute exacerbation of asthma that does not respond to conventional therapy is called
status asthmatics.
Salient features
Symptoms/signs Mild Moderate Severe
Respiratory rate Normal Increased Increased
Alertness Normal Normal Restless/drowsy
Dyspnoea Absent or mild moderate Severe
Pulsus paradoxus <10mmHg 10–20mm Hg 20–40mmHg
Accessory muscle No or mild Moderate intercostals Severe intercostal
use intercostals interactions with interactions with
retractions tracheosternal tracheosternal
retractions retractions with nasal
flaring
Colour Pink Pale Grey or cyanotic
Auscultation End expiratory Wheeze during Breath sounds
wheeze only expiration & inaudible
inspiration
Oxygen saturation >95% 90–95% <90%
Paco2 <35mm Hg 35–40 mmHg >40 mmHg
PEFR 70–90% of 50–70% of predicted <50% of predicted or
predicted orbest or personal best personal best
 Assessment of severity of acute attack of asthma
Life threatening asthma Silent chest, Cyanosis, Poor respiratory effort, Hypotension
Exhaustion, Confusion, Spo2 <92% , PEFR <33% best/ predicted
Acute severe asthma Can’t complete sentences in one breath or breathless to talk or feed
Spo2 <92%, PEFR 33 –35% best or predicted
Pulse >140/min in 2 to 5 years
>125/min in >5 years
Respiration >40breaths/min in 2 to 5 years, 30/min in 5 to 7 years
414

Pediatric Conditions
Moderate asthma Able to talk in sentences
exacerbation Spo2 >/=92% , PEFR 50% best or predicted
Pulse </=140/min in 2 to 5 years
</=125/min in >5 years
Respiration </=40breaths/min in 2 to 5 years
</=30/min in 5 to 7 years
Pharmacological treatment
Initial assessment-
Impending respiratoryfailure, Moderate to severeattack-
 Oxygen
 Nebulizersalbutamol + ipratropium
 Inj. terbutaline/ adrenalineSC
 IV corticosteroids
 Transfer to ICU-Good response
Lifethreatening attack
 Same as above +Reassess after 1 hr.
If poor/ partial response,
 Correct acidosis
 Trial of Mg So4/ terbutaline
If no response after 2-4 hrs.
 Continue above treatment and add Inj. amoniphylline infusion
415