Chapter 19
DENTAL CONDITIONS
TOOTH AVULSION
One of the commonest sequelae of facial trauma is tooth avulsion, exfoliation or articulation.
Salient features
 History of fall, interpersonal violence, sports injury, assault or accident.
 Children are more common.
 Central incisors and developing teeth are more frequently avulsed.
 Patient presents extreme pain with a bleeding socket, clot in the socket and a raw
wound with or without Lip & Labial mucosa injury.
Treatment
 Immediately refer to a dentist. Best result is observed if tooth is reimplanted within 5-20
minutes.
 Fixation of implanted tooth with periodontal wiring, arch bar wiring or composite resin;
fixation period 6 to 8 weeks; root canal treatment done after reimplantation only (to avoid
desiccation of periodontal ligament).
Interim storage
 Best method is to place back the tooth in the socket immediately. Other storage media are
saliva, milk (placed in ice since this minimizes the adverse effects on the periodontal
ligament) and saline.
Pharmacological treatment
 Cap. amoxycillin 250-500 mg 3 times a day for 5 days Or Tab. ciprofloxacin 250-500 mg
twice a day for 5 days.
 Tab. diclofenac Potassium 50 mg b.d. or Tab. ibuprofen 400 mg 3 times for 3-5 days.
TOOTHACHE
Direct causes are dental caries, periodontal pocket, abrasion, attrition & erosion, peridontitis,
third molar eruption (Impacted Tooth). The indirect causes of toothache are maxillary
sinusitis (recent bout of common cold) & trigeminal neuralgia.
Pharmacological treatment
 Cap. amoxycillin 250 -500 mg 3 times a day for 5 days. Or Tab. ciprofloxacin 250 -500
mg 2 times a day for 5 days.
 Tab. diclofenac potassium 50 mg b.d. or Tab. ibuprofen 400 mg 3 times for 3-5 days.
Surgical treatment
 Excavation of caries and sedative dressing with clove oil. Removal of plaque & calculus
by scaling & local medicaments. Removal of irritant like high filling and high spot on
crown or bridge. Anaesthetize the tooth and extirpate the pulp (if pulp is exposed).
416

Dental Conditions
 Removal of Impacted third molar.
 Treatment should be with radiographs to rule out cause & radiograph after 6 weeks to
assess bone loss and root resorption.
Patient education
 Maintenance of oral hygiene.
 Importance of tooth preservation should be explained.
 Pit and fissure sealing in pediatric patient.
 Not to bite anything hard from anterior teeth during fixation period.
TOOTH FRACTURE/ MANDIBLE OR MAXILLARY BONE FRACTURE
Salient features
 Pain, mobility of fractured segment of tooth or bone
 Step deformity,Painful or restricted TMJ movement
 Bleeding from traumatic site
Treatment
 Perform primary treatment for bleeding & pain
 Primary sutures for soft tissue trauma
 Radiographs for fracture suspected sites
 Refer to oral maxilla facial surgeon for bone fractures
DENTAL CARIES
This is a multifactorial infectious disease of hard tissues of teeth characterized by
demineralization of inorganic and destruction of organic part of the tooth. (Enamel & Dentin)
Salient features
 Usually asymptomatic in early stages.
 Patient presents with tooth sensitivity and tooth ache only on cold & sweet intakes
which may disappear on removal of stimuli.
Treatment
 Examine for stage of caries and treat accordingly.
 Careful assessment of oral cavity for presence of any white/ brown or black spot.
Non-pharmacological treatment
 In non-cavitated lesion and low risk patient with good oral hygiene practices, no
treatment is given.
 In cavitated lesion, restoration is done.
Pharmacological treatment
 Patients with caries is likely to progress (in high risk patient) pit and fissure sealant.
 Topical 2% sodium fluoride.
417

Dental Conditions
 Mouth wash with 0.2% chlorhexidine twice a day.
 Advisefluorinated toothpaste or fluorinated mouthwashes.
Assessment of response to therapy
 For caries active patient - follow up visit every 3 months and to check the progression of
white / brown or black spot on the teeth.
 For normal patients -follow up every6 months to 1 year to check the development of the
white spot cavitation.
Patient education/prevention
 For caries active/high risk patient preferably.
 Diet control and avoidance of sugar containing food.
 Frequent ingestion of food containing sucrose should be substituted by sugar free foods.
 Oral hygiene: (a) brushing of teeth twice a day (b) flossing (c) thorough rinsing after
every meal.
 Fluoride application using Topical 2% sodium fluoride (by dentist) 4 applications at
weekly intervals at the age of 3, 7, 11 and 13 years.
 0.05% sodium fluoride daily rinse (should not be swallowed).
 0.2% sodium fluoride supervised weekly rinse in school (age of children >7 years) only if
these children have been identified as caries active patients.
References
1. Sturdevant CM. Roberson TM, Heymann HO, Sturdevant JR. In: The Art andScience of Operative Dentistry,
3rd Edition, Mosby 1995, pp 100-20.
2. Mitchell DA, Mitchel L. In: Oxford Handbook of Clinical Dentistry, 2nd Edition, reprint 1996, pp 28.
DENTAL ABSCESS
Patient presents with pain and swelling. The most common types of dental abscesses are
periapical abscess and lateral periodontal abscess.
I. PERIAPICAL ABSCESS
Salient features
 Presence of caries or trauma. Severe throbbing pain, disturbed sleep
 Tooth is tender to touch & extruded from socket. Tooth may be mobile and associated
with localized or diffuse swelling.
Immediate treatment
 To give antibiotics as given below and refer to a dentist.
Pharmacological treatment
 Cap. amoxycillin 250 -500 mg 3 times a day for 5 days. Or Tab. ciprofloxacin 250-500
mg two times a day for 5 days.
 Tab. diclofenac potassium 50 mg b.d. or Tab. ibuprofen 400 mg 3 times a day for 3-5
days.
418

Dental Conditions
Surgical treatment
 Drainage of pus by entering the pulp chamber (pulpectomy) & relieve occlusion.
 If fluctuant swelling of soft tissue is present drain by incision.
 Extraction or root canal treatment should be done when acute symptoms subside.
 Spread of infection should be closelyobserved to prevent complications like Ludwig's
angina or osteomyelitis.
Patient education
 Maintenance of oral hygiene (see details in section on oral hygiene).
 Control of diabetes mellitus, if present.
 No hot fomentation over the skin.
II. LATERAL PERIDONTAL ABSCESS
Salient features
 Same as in acute periapical abscess,often associated with bad taste.
 Tooth is usually mobile and tender on percussion, associated with localized or diffuse
swelling of the adjacent periodontium.
 Vitality test usually positive if no associated pulpal problem.
 Radiograph shows vertical or horizontal bone loss in relation to the tooth.
Pharmacological treatment
 Cap. amoxycillin 250-500 mg 3 times a day for 5 days.
 Tab. metronidazole 400 mg 3 times a day for 5 days.
 Tab. diclofenac potassium 50 mg b.d. or Tab. ibuprofen 400 mg 3 times/dayfor 3-5 days.
Surgical treatment
 Debridement of pocket and drainage of pus and irrigation with chlorhexidine. Spread of
infection to be closely observed to prevent complications like Ludwig's angina.
Patient education
 Maintenance of oral hygiene. No hot fomentation over the skin.Control of diabetes
mellitus if present.
ADULT TYPE PERIODONTITIS
Most common dental disease of the gums & periodontium.
Salient features
 Swollen gums, bleeding from gums either spontaneously or while brushing. Pain on
eating something hard, difficulty in chewing food, dull pain in the gums, pus
discharge from gum on pressing, loosening of teeth, recession of gums.
 There is slowly progressive destruction of periodontitum, loss of periodontal
attachment and presence of periodontal pocket.
 Bad breath (Halitosis), sensitivity to hot & Cold intakes
419

Dental Conditions
Non-pharmacological treatment
 Refer to a dentist for oral prophylaxis in form of thorough scaling and root planning.
 Advise brushing twice daily once after breakfast and once after dinner with super soft
tooth brush for at least 3 minutes.
Pharmacological treatment
Local therapy
 Advise antiplaque toothpast containing antibiotics.
 Gel metronidazole to be massaged on the gums twice daily.
 Rinsing with 0.2% chlorhexidine mouthwash twice daily which is effective after scaling.
Systemic therapy
 In adults, Cap. tetracycline 250 mg 4 times a day for 5-7 days.
 In very deep pockets: Combination of drugs i.e., Tab. ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily &
Tab. tinidazole 300 mg twice daily for 5-7 days.
 Recheck the depth of periodontal pockets, if it persists, refer to dentist for further
management.
References
1. Ramford and Ash. Peridontology and Periodontitis. In: Moderntherapy and practice. 1st Indian Edition,
AITBS Publishers 1996, pp 163.
2. Mitchell D A, Mitcchell L. In: Oxford Handbook of Clinical Dentistry, 2nd Edition reprint. 1996, pp. 212.
JUVENILE PERIODONTITIS
It is characterized by rapid destruction of periodontal tissues.
Salient features
 Common in the age group of 13-25 years.
 Mobility in incisors and molars, spacing in upper incisors, distolabial migration of
upper incisors, arc shaped bone loss extending from distal surface of second premolar
to mesial surface of second molar.
Pharmacological treatment
 Cap. tetracycline 250 mg 4 times a day for 14 days.
Surgical treatment
 Extraction of badly involved teeth. Refer the patient to periodontist for further
periodontical management at the earliest
Patient education
 Proper brushing twice daily with super soft tooth brush.
INFLAMMATORY GINGIVAL ENLARGEMENTS
The gingival enlargement can be acute which is very painful or they can be chronic which
may be painless. There are many causes for gingival enlargements. Before giving treatment,
420

Dental Conditions
etiological factor must be evaluated.
Salient features
 Acute enlargements may be localized or generalized, very painful, deep red in color,
soft friable with shiny surface.
 Chronic type may be localized or generalized, often painless and slowly progressive.
Pharmacological treatment
 Tab. ciprofloxacin 500 mg 2 times a day for 3-5 days.
 Tab. diclofenac potassium 50 mg b.d. or Tab. ibuprofen 400 mg 3 times a day for 3-5
days.
 Rinsing with 0.2% chlorhexidine mouthwash twice daily.
 Refer to a periodontist for surgical management and drainage of pus.
Patient education
 Proper brushing twice daily with super soft tooth brush.
 Shafer, Hine, Levy. In: A textbook of oral pathology. 4th Edition, Saunders, pp 782.
DENTAL FLUOROSIS
Salient features
 Mainly seen in patients who are drinking fluorinated water (> 3PPM) during tooth
development time.
 White chalky/ brown spots on crowns of teeth
 Brownish discoloration on enamel mainly, involves anterior teeth & first molars
Treatment
 Oral hygiene maintainance as patients are more caries susceptible
 Bleaching of teeth (Whitening of teeth)
 Veneers or laminates for better esthetics
TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA
It is sudden, sharp, severe or short duration, like electric shock like pain.
Salient features
 Presenceof trigger zones involving trigeminal nerve areas
 Unilateral sharp, shooting, lancinating type of pain may provoke on touch, washing
face, shaving, on cold wind exposure.
 Pain will be in recurrent bouts of attacks, may persist for second to minute
Treatment
 Diagnostic dose of carbamazepine given to establish diagnosis
 Evaluation of any primary lesion in brain by MRI
421

Dental Conditions
 Tab. carbamazepine 200 mg. t.d.s as per intensity & frequency of pain & attacks.
 Refer to Dentists for further evaluation & treatment.
ORAL CANCER (HABIT RELATED DISEASE)
Oral cancer is most common and associated with smoking and tobacco containing habit.
Adults are more commonly involved.
Salient features
 Long standing (> 2 weeks) non-healing chronic ulcer in oral cavity. Bleeding & non
painful ulcer or growth
 Regional lymphadenopathy, mobility or exfoliation of teeth.
 Decreased appetite, reduced weight, Poor Oral Hygiene, history of tobacco habit since
long time. Altered speech, difficulty in opening of mouth (Trismus)
Treatment
 Refer to Oncologist after thorough clinical and histopathological examination.
 Advice symptomatic treatment if required.
ORAL SUBMUCUS FIBROSIS (OSMF)
Salient features
 Most common disease related with tobacco, lime and Betelnut
 Gradually reduced mouth opening (Trismus)
 Blanching (White opaque) oral mucosa
 Recurrent ulcers & burning sensations on taking spicy food.
 Change of voice, difficulty in deglutition.
 Poor oral hygiene with gingivitis &periodontitis
 Small shrunken uvula and decreased mobility of soft palate
Treatment
 Quit habit as soon as possible, mouth opening exercises (physical exercises)
 Oral Hygiene prophylaxis
 Local medicaments in form of steroids
CYST OR TUMOR OF JAW
Salient features
 Facial asymmetry,Nontender swelling or growth,Paresthesia of jaw
 Displacement of teeth, improper occlusion
 May be having discharge,Discoloration of teeth,Absence ofteeth in arch
422

Dental Conditions
Treatment
 Refer to oral maxilla facial surgeon for bone fractures
GENERAL MEASURES FOR GOOD ORAL HYGIENE
 Select the right quality of tooth brush which should be short, soft and have uniformly
trimmed bristles. Change the brush at least after every 3 months
 Brush teeth at least twice a day for 2-3 minutes particularly at night before going to sleep.
 Use right technique of teeth brushing. Never use force while brushing. Use flossing at
least once a day.
 Avoid too much sugar and aerated drinks. Avoid eating in between meals, if cannot be
avoided rinse your mouth or preferably brush your teeth.
 Do not ingest or swallow fluorinated toothpaste while brushing.
 Ensure regular dental checkup at 6 monthly interval.
ANTIBIOTIC PROPHYLAXIS IN DENTAL PROCEDURE
 If patient is in the high or moderate risk groups, then antibiotic prophylaxis is
recommended for the following dental procedures:
 Dental extractions.
 Periodontal procedures including surgery, scaling and root planing, probing, and recall
maintenance.
 Dental implant placement and reimplantation of avulsed teeth.
 Endodontic (root canal) instrumentation or surgery only beyond the apex.
 Sub gingival placement of antibiotic fibers or strips.
 Prophylactic cleaning of teeth or implants where bleeding is anticipated.
Antibiotic prophylaxis not recommended for the following dental procedures
 Restorative dentistry(operative and prosthodontic) with or without retraction cord.
 Local anesthetic injections (nonintraligamentary). Intracanal endodontic treatment; post
placement and buildup.
 Placement of rubber dams, postoperative suture removal, taking of oral impressions, and
fluoride treatments.
 Placement of removable prosthodontic or orthodontic appliances and orthodontic
appliance adjustment.
 Taking of oral radiographs.
 Shedding of primary teeth.
423